The species of partridge is any member of a paraphyletic group of organisms that consist of all medium-sized non-migratory birds, with a wide native distribution throughout Europe, Asia, and parts of Africa. They are sometimes grouped in the Perdicinae subfamily of the Phasianidae (pheasants, quail, etc.). However, molecular research suggests that partridges are not a distinct taxon within the family Phasianidae, but that some species are closer to the pheasants, while others are closer to the junglefowl.


== Description ==
These are medium-sized birds, intermediate between the larger pheasants and the smaller quail.


== Range and habitat ==
Partridges are native to Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East. Some species are found nesting on steppes or agricultural land, while other species prefer more forested areas. They nest on the ground and have a diet consisting of seeds, grapes and insects.


== Hunting ==
Species such as the grey partridge and the red-legged partridge are popular as game birds, and are often reared in captivity and released for the purpose of hunting. For the same reason, they have been introduced into large areas of North America.


== Cultural references ==
According to Greek legend, the first partridge appeared when Daedalus threw his nephew, Perdix, off the sacred hill of Athena in a fit of jealous rage. Supposedly mindful of his fall, the bird does not build its nest in the trees, nor take lofty flights and avoids high places.In the Bible it is stated: "As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool." (Jeremiah 17 : 11, King James Bible).
Probably the most famous reference to the partridge is in the Christmas carol, "The Twelve Days of Christmas".  The first gift listed is "a partridge in a pear tree", and these words end each verse. Since partridges are unlikely to be seen in pear-trees (they are ground-nesting birds) it has been suggested that the text "a pear tree" is a corruption of the French "une perdrix".The partridge has also been used as a symbol that represents Kurdish nationalism. It is called Kew. Sherko Kurmanj discusses the paradox of symbols in Iraq as an attempt to make a distinction between the Kurds and the Arabs. He says that while Iraqis generally regards the palm tree, falcon, and sword as their national symbols, the Kurds consider the oak, partridge, and dagger as theirs.


== Species list in taxonomic order ==
Genus Lerwa
Snow partridge, Lerwa lerwa
Genus Tetraophasis
Verreaux's monal-partridge, Tetraophasis obscurus
Szechenyi's monal-partridge, Tetraophasis szechenyii
Genus Alectoris
Arabian partridge, Alectoris melanocephala
Przevalski's partridge, Alectoris magna
Rock partridge, Alectoris graeca
Chukar, Alectoris chukar
Philby's partridge, Alectoris philbyi
Barbary partridge, Alectoris barbara
Red-legged partridge, Alectoris rufa
Genus Ammoperdix
See-see partridge, Ammoperdix griseogularis
Sand partridge, Ammoperdix heyi
Genus Perdix
Grey partridge, Perdix perdix
Daurian partridge, Perdix dauurica
Tibetan partridge, Perdix hodgsoniae
Genus Rhizothera
Long-billed partridge, Rhizothera longirostris
Dulit partridge، Rhizothera dulitensis
Genus Margaroperdix
Madagascar partridge, Margaroperdix madagascarensis
Genus Melanoperdix
Black wood-partridge, Melanoperdix nigra
Genus Xenoperdix
Rubeho forest partridge, Xenoperdix obscuratus
Udzungwa forest partridge, Xenoperdix udzungwensis
Genus Arborophila, the hill partridges
Hill partridge, Arborophila torqueola
Sichuan partridge, Arborophila rufipectus
Chestnut-breasted partridge, Arborophila mandellii
White-necklaced partridge, Arborophila gingica
Rufous-throated partridge, Arborophila rufogularis
White-cheeked partridge, Arborophila atrogularis
Taiwan partridge, Arborophila crudigularis
Hainan partridge, Arborophila ardens
Chestnut-bellied partridge, Arborophila javanica
Grey-breasted partridge, Arborophila orientalis
Bar-backed partridge, Arborophila brunneopectus
Orange-necked partridge, Arborophila davidi
Chestnut-headed partridge, Arborophila cambodiana
Red-breasted partridge, Arborophila hyperythra
Red-billed partridge, Arborophila rubrirostris
Sumatran partridge, Arborophila sumatrana
Genus Tropicoperdix
Scaly-breasted partridge, Tropicoperdix chloropus
Chestnut-necklaced partridge, Tropicoperdix charltonii
Genus Caloperdix
Ferruginous partridge, Caloperdix oculea
Genus Haematortyx
Crimson-headed partridge, Haematortyx sanguiniceps
Genus Rollulus
Crested partridge, Rollulus roulroul
Genus Bambusicola
Mountain bamboo partridge, Bambusicola fytchii
Chinese bamboo partridge, Bambusicola thoracica


== See also ==
Dick Potts, English ecologist and specialist in the partridge.


== References ==


== External links ==
Videos, photos and sounds - Internet Bird Collection