The longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae), also known as long-horned or longicorns, are a large family of beetles, with over 35,000 species described, slightly more than half from the Eastern Hemisphere. Most species are characterized by extremely long antennae, which are often as long as or longer than the beetle's body. In various members of the family, however, the antennae are quite short (e.g., Neandra brunnea) and such species can be difficult to distinguish from related beetle families such as the Chrysomelidae. The scientific name of this beetle family goes back to a figure from Greek mythology: after an argument with nymphs, the shepherd Cerambus was transformed into a large beetle with horns.


== Description ==
Other than the antennal length, the most consistently distinctive feature of the family is that the antennal sockets are located on low tubercles on the face; other beetles with long antennae lack these tubercles, and cerambycids with short antennae still possess them. They otherwise vary greatly in size, shape, sculpture, and coloration. A number of species mimic ants, bees, and wasps, though a majority of species are cryptically colored. The titan beetle (Titanus giganteus) from northeastern South America is often considered the largest insect (though not the heaviest, and not the longest including legs), with a maximum known body length of just over 16.7 cm (6.6 in).


== Biology ==

All known longhorn beetle larvae feed on plant tissue such as stems, trunks, or roots of both herbaceous and woody plants, often in injured or weak trees. A few species are serious pests. The larvae, called roundheaded borers, bore into wood, where they can cause extensive damage to either living trees or untreated lumber (or, occasionally, to wood in buildings; the old-house borer, Hylotrupes bajulus, is a particular problem indoors).


=== Predators ===


==== Parasitoids ====
In North America native Cerambycids are widely the victims of Ontsira mellipes. O. mellipes may be useful in controlling a forestry pest in this same family, Anoplophora glabripennis, that is invasive in North America. (Ontsira is a genus of parasitoid wasps in the Doryctinae.)


== Classification ==

As with many large families, different authorities have tended to recognize many different subfamilies, or sometimes split subfamilies off as separate families entirely (e.g., Disteniidae, Oxypeltidae, and Vesperidae); there is thus some instability and controversy regarding the constituency of the Cerambycidae. There are few truly defining features for the group as a whole, at least as adults, as there are occasional species or species groups which may lack any given feature; the family and its closest relatives, therefore, constitute a taxonomically difficult group, and relationships of the various lineages are still poorly understood. The oldest member of the family is Cerambycinus from the Late Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone of Germany, with other Mesozoic fossils including Cretoprionus and Sinopraecipuus from the Aptian aged Yixian Formation of China, and Qitianniu from the early Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) aged Burmese amber, belonging to the subfamily Subfamily Prioninae, Tribe Meroscelisini.


=== Subfamilies ===
The eight subfamilies are:
Cerambycinae Latreille, 1802
Dorcasominae Lacordaire, 1869 (including former Apatophyseinae Lacordaire, 1869)
Lamiinae Latreille, 1825
Lepturinae Latreille, 1802
Necydalinae Latreille, 1825
Parandrinae Blanchard, 1845
Prioninae Latreille, 1802
Spondylidinae Audinet-Serville, 1832 (including former Aseminae Thomson, 1860)


== Notable genera and species ==

Acrocinus longimanus – harlequin beetle, a large species where the male has very long front legs
Anoplophora chinensis – citrus long-horned beetle, a major pest
Anoplophora glabripennis – Asian long-horned beetle, an invasive pest species
Aridaeus thoracicus – tiger longicorn (Australia)
Cacosceles newmannii - Southern African longhorn beetle that is a surgacane pest
Desmocerus californicus dimorphus – valley elderberry longhorn beetle, a threatened subspecies from California
Moneilema – cactus longhorn beetles, which are flightless
Onychocerus albitarsis – the only known beetle with a venomous sting
Petrognatha gigas – giant African longhorn beetle
Prionoplus reticularis – huhu beetle, the heaviest beetle in New Zealand
Rosalia alpina – Rosalia longhorn beetle, a threatened European species
Tetraopes tetrophthalmus – red milkweed beetle, a toxic species with aposematic colors
Tetropium fuscum – brown spruce longhorn beetle, an invasive pest species
Titanus giganteus – titan beetle, one of the largest beetles in the world


== See also ==
List of longhorn beetle (Cerambycidae) species recorded in Britain


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Monné, Miguel A. & Hovore, Frank T. (2005) Electronic Checklist of the Cerambycidae of the Western Hemisphere. PDF Cerambycids.com


== External links ==
Gallery Photo gallery of worldwide long-horned beetles
Photo gallery "Longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) of the West Palaearctic Region"
CDFA Cerambycidae of the New World
Cerambycidae of French Guiana
National Museu, Rio, Brazil Holotype images
Iberodorcadion Coleoptera, Cerambycidae, Dorcadion - RedIRIS
VIDEOS - Longicornes (Dorcadion, Cerambycidae, Coleoptera) 
Cerambycidae of Borneo pdf
BugGuide.net - Longhorned Beetles (Cerambycidae)
Anoplophora chinensis, citrus longhorned beetle on the University of Florida / Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Featured Creatures website
Coleoptera: Cerambycidae, University of Florida, Dept. of Entomology and Nematology
Wood-boring beetles of the World
[1]