The desert iguana (Dipsosaurus dorsalis) is one of the most common lizards of the Sonoran and Mojave deserts of the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico. They also occur on several Gulf of California islands. Their color is mostly grey and tan.


== Taxonomy ==
The species was first described in the Catalog of North American Reptiles, by Spencer Fullerton Baird and Charles Frédéric Girard,  in 1859 as Crotaphytus dorsalis it was reclassified two years later as Dipsosaurus  dofus dorsalis by Edward Hallowell.  The generic name comes from a combination of two Greek words meaning "thirsty lizard": "Dipsa" (δίψα) for "thirsty", and "sauros" (σαῦρος) for "lizard".  The specific name, "dorsalis", comes from the Latin word dorsum meaning "spike", in reference to a row of enlarged keeled scales on the middle of the lizard's back which form a crest that extends almost to the tip of its vent. Dipsosaurus contains two species, D. dorsalis, and D. catalinensis. Genetic evidence supports Dipsosaurus being the most basal extant member of Iguanidae, diverging during the late Eocene, about 38 million years ago.There are two peninsular and one continental subspecies of the desert iguana.


== Description ==
The desert iguana is a medium-sized lizard which averages 41 cm (16 in) in total length but can grow to a maximum of 61 cm (24 in) including the tail. They are pale gray-tan to cream in color with a light brown reticulated pattern on their backs and sides. Down the center of the back is a row of slightly-enlarged, keeled dorsal scales that become slightly larger as you move down the back. The reticulated pattern gives way to brown spots near the back legs, turning into stripes along the tail. The tail is usually around 1½ times longer than the body from snout to vent. The belly is pale. During the breeding season, the sides become pinkish in both sexes.


== Habitat ==
Their preferred habitat is largely contained within the range of the creosote bush, mainly dry, sandy desert scrubland below 1,000 m (3,300 ft). They have a significant presence in the Sonoran and Mojave deserts. It can also be found in rocky streambeds up to 1,000 m. In the southern portion of its range this lizard lives in areas of arid subtropical scrub and tropical deciduous forest.
These lizards can withstand high temperatures and are out and about after other lizards have retreated into their burrows. They seek shade when their body temperature is in the low-forties (celsius), and seek the protection of a burrow when their body temperature reaches the mid-forties (celsius). They burrow extensively and if threatened will scamper into a shrub and go quickly down a burrow. Their burrows are usually dug in the sand under bushes like the creosote. They also often use burrows of kit foxes and desert tortoises.
Reproduction also plays a role in where these lizards are found. It is believed that the high temperature environment helps with successful hatching of eggs. The eggs often hatch between temperatures of 28 and 38 degrees Celsius.


== Diet and reproduction ==
Mating takes place in the early spring, often around May-June. It is believed that only one clutch of eggs is laid each year, with each clutch having 3-8 eggs. The hatchlings emerge around September.Desert iguanas are primarily herbivorous, eating buds, fruits and leaves of many annual and perennial plants.  They are especially attracted to the yellow flowers of the creosote bush.  They will eat the foliage of the creosote bush as well. Predators of these iguanas and their eggs are birds of prey, foxes, rats, long-tailed weasels, some snakes, and humans.


== References ==

Frost, D.R. and R.E. Etheridge (1989) A Phylogenetic Analysis and Taxonomy of Iguanian Lizards (Reptilia: Squamata). Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist. Misc. Publ. 81
Frost, D.R.,  R. Etheridge, D. Janies and T.A. Titus (2001) Total evidence, sequence alignment, evolution of Polychrotid lizards, and a reclassification of the Iguania (Squamata: Iguania). American Museum Novitates 3343: 38 pp.
Hancock, T. V., & Gleeson, T. T. (2007). Contributions to Elevated Metabolism during Recovery: Dissecting the Excess Postexercise Oxygen Consumption (EPOC) in the Desert Iguana (Dipsosaurus dorsalis). Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 81(1), 1–13.
Revell, T. K., & Dunbar, S. G. (2007). The energetic savings of sleep versus temperature in the Desert Iguana ( Dipsosaurus dorsalis) at three ecologically relevant temperatures. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology. Part A, Molecular & Integrative Physiology, 148(2), 393–398.
Valdivia-Carrillo, T., García-De León, F. J., Blázquez, M. C., Gutiérrez-Flores, C., & González Zamorano, P. (2017). Phylogeography and Ecological Niche Modeling of the Desert Iguana (Dipsosaurus dorsalis, Baird & Girard 1852) in the Baja California Peninsula. The Journal of Heredity, 108(6), 640–649.


== External links ==
Desert Iguana Pictures
Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum: Desert Iguana (Dipsosaurus dorsalis)
San Diego Natural History Museum: Dipsosaurus dorsalis (Desert Iguana)