The natterjack toad (Epidalea calamita) is a toad native to sandy and heathland areas of Europe. Adults are 60–70 mm in length, and are distinguished from common toads by a yellow line down the middle of the back, and parallel paratoid glands. They have relatively short legs, which gives them a distinctive gait, contrasting with the hopping movement of many other toad species.
Natterjacks have a very loud and distinctive mating call amplified by the single vocal sac found under the chin of the male; their name literally means the chattering toad – the jack (or toad) that natters  (or chatters).


== Life history ==

Natterjacks live for up to 15 years, and feed mainly on insects, especially beetles. At night, they move around open terrain with sparse vegetation, and their tracks can often be seen in loose sand. They move considerable distances each night, enabling the species to colonize new habitats very quickly.


=== Reproduction ===
The natterjack toad spawns between the end of April and July, laying strings of eggs in shallow, warm pools. Because the natterjack toad is often present in low numbers, its loud mating calls are important so that the sexes can find each other.
For natterjacks, pools need to have a very slight slope with sparse vegetation on the banks and in the water. As such pools are often temporary, sometimes the tadpoles die when the pools dry out. The natterjack compensates for that risk by mating over an extended period each summer. Thus, in September, the age of the juveniles can vary from one to three months.  Early breeders seldom breed again later in the season, though some females do spawn twice in a year.


== Distribution ==
Populations of the natterjack extend through 17 European countries. In the British Isles, the toad is now almost completely confined to coastal sites. The natterjack is the only species of toad native to Ireland. It is found on the Dingle Peninsula and at Derrynane in County Kerry, and also in County Wexford, where it was introduced to a dune site.In mainland Europe, particularly in the southern part of its range, it lives inland in a variety of habitats.


== Conservation ==


=== UK ===
In the UK, the threatened status of the species resulted in a national Biodiversity Action Plan designating it as one of three protected amphibians. Reasons for its threatened status include:

Loss of habitat from human overpopulation
Deterioration and loss of lowland heaths
Reduction in habitable coast from construction of dykes and seawalls
Acidification of aquatic habitat from acid rain and other pollutionIn England, the toad's sand dune habitat is protected by a number of national nature reserves.  For example, in the north-west, reserves are at Hoylake, Ainsdale Sand Dunes, North Walney and Sandscale Haws. In Scotland, where the species is confined to the Solway Firth,  a reserve is at Caerlaverock. In Wales, the species became extinct in the 20th century, but has been reintroduced as part of the Biodiversity Action Plan.


=== Ireland ===
To reverse habitat loss, the National Parks and Wildlife Service has created ponds for the species with some funding from the Heritage Council.


== In fiction ==
The natterjack is a primary character in the book The Time Garden by Edward Eager. In it, the natterjack is portrayed as a magical creature that understands the laws of magic and time, and assists the children on their adventures.
Natterjack is a character in the CBeebies show Kerwhizz.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Beebee T and Denton J (1992) An evaluation of survey methods for studying natterjack toads (Bufo calamita) outside the breeding season. Amphibia-Reptilia 13: 365–374.
Beebee T and Denton J (1996) Natterjack Toad Conservation Handbook. English Nature, Peterborough.
Herpetological Conservation Trust (2009) Natterjack Toad Species Action Plan. Bournemouth.
The Herpetological Conservation Trust (undated) Natterjack Toad Survey Guidelines. Bournemouth.
Natural England (2011) Standing Advice Species Sheet: Natterjack toads. Sheffield.


== External links ==
Amphibians and Reptiles of Europe
Fauna Europaea West Palaearctic distribution.
Natterjack Toad Species Action Plan (pdf). Amphibian & Reptile Conservation (July 2009) — via Internet Archive.
Natterjack Toad V 2.1. (Species Action Plan) (pdf) Cumbria Biodiversity Data Centre (April 2010).
Competencies for Species Survey: Natterjack Toad (pdf). Chartered Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management – CIEEM (25 April 2013).
Jonathan Warren (1999). "Dumfries & Galloway Local Species Action Plan: Natterjack Toad". Dumfries & Galloway Local Biodiversity Action Plan. Dumfries and Galloway Council. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
"Natterjack toad (Bufo calamita)". Wildscreen Arkive. n.d. Archived from the original on 8 March 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
Scottish Natural Heritage and Forestry Commission (n.d.). "All About ... Natterjack toad" (PDF). Retrieved 2 November 2015.
"Natterjack Toad". Froglife. 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
Natural England and Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (9 October 2014). "Natterjack toads: surveys and mitigation for development projects". Gov.UK. Retrieved 2 November 2015. Last updated 2015-05-12.