Delairea is a plant genus within the family Asteraceae that is native to South Africa. It is classified within the tribe Senecioneae. It contains only one species, Delairea odorata, which was previously included in the genus Senecio as Senecio mikanioides. It is known as Cape ivy in some parts of the world (US) and German ivy in others (Britain, Ireland).


== Description ==

Delairea odorata has 2 to 4 -inch multi-lobed leaves that somewhat resemble those of the unrelated English ivy. Its flowers are yellow, which lack the petal-like ray florets found in typical daisies. It is a vine that climbs up trees and will reach heights of five metres in suitable climates. Given time it will smother trees.
The name Cape ivy is also used ambiguously for Senecio angulatus, a different but related creeper. S angulatus  has been incorrectly listed as a synonym to Delairea odorata historically, and these species have been confused regularly despite the visual differences. Senecio tamoides is another similar looking plant in the same tribe, which is often mistaken for the two aforementioned species. 
A feature that distinguishes it from Senecio angulatus are the small ear-shaped appendages at the base of the stalks of the leaves and its flowers which do not have obvious 'petals', whereas S angulatus and S tamoides have daisy-like flowers.


== Ecological impact and control methods ==
Delairea odorata has become an invasive species in California, Hawaii, Oregon, New Zealand and Australia. The plant will cover shrubs and trees, inhibiting growth and will also cover ground intensively over a wide area, thereby preventing seeds from germinating or growing. It is also toxic to animals who eat it and to fish where it trails into waterways.The creeper can be controlled or eliminated by a combination of physical and chemical methods. Unless the root system is removed or poisoned the plant will regrow. Young plants can be pulled out with their roots but older plants will break off leaving the roots in place. Despite its invasive nature, the plant is grown as an ornamental houseplant for its foliage.
In Hawaii an introduced species of moth (Galtara extensa) for the biological control of Senecio madagascariensis proved to feed also on Delairea odorata.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Crockett, James (1972). Foliage House Plants. New York, NY: Time-Life Books. pp. 142–143.Nelson, Dave (1999). "Invasive Exotic Cape Ivy". Retrieved 2007-05-07.Greater Wellington Regional Council, New Zealand. "Greater Wellington - German ivy (Senecio mikanioides)". Archived from the original on October 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-01-16.
Greater Wellington Regional Council, New Zealand. "Greater Wellington - Cape ivy (Senecio angulatus)". Archived from the original on October 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-01-16.


== External links ==
 Media related to Delairea odorata at Wikimedia Commons
 Data related to Delairea at Wikispecies