Dracophyllum traversii, commonly known as mountain neinei, grass tree, and pineapple tree is a tree (or, in some cases, a shrub) that grows from 0.2–13 m tall. Its leaves form tufts at the end of branches, like that of species in the family Bromeliaceae. Endemic to New Zealand it is found in the North and South Islands, producing up to 3000 red flowers in Summer.It was first described by Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1867 and was placed in the Subgenus Dracophyllum by W. R. B. Oliver in 1928. A cladistic analysis using genetic sequencing was published in 2010, revealing that D. traversii was indeed related to D. latifolium as Oliver had thought. The status of D. pyramidale as a synonym is disputed by taxonomic institutions and botanists.


== Description ==
Dracophyllum traversii is a shrub or tree that grows to a height of 0.2–13 m tall. It has flaky light brown bark with leaves that concentrate at the ends of branches similar to that of species in the family Bromeliaceae. Its leaves are 9–86 by 1.7–5 cm, leathery and very finely toothed such that there are 18 to 20 teeth every 10 mm. The green leaves are each sheathed in 3–7 by 3–5 mm green to light brown sheaths. It flowers from October to February with densely packed 18–40 cm long inflorescences producing 500 to 3000 or more red (sometimes green) flowers on each. The inflorescence has an axis 1.3–1.65 cm in diameter with 3–6 cm branches at right angles to the axis. It fruits from December to May producing yellow-brown coloured 0.95–1 mm long egg-shaped seeds. The seeds are dispersed by the wind, easy given their tiny size.
		
		
D. traversii is also estimated to have a lifespan of 500 - 600 years and is deciduous, losing its leaves during the growing season, mainly from December through to March. It has an average annual wood increment for adult trees of 0.4 - 0.49 mm and 0.6 - 0.9 mm for juvenile trees between 100 - 150 years old.


== Taxonomy ==
D. traversii was first described by Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1867. Dracophyllum means 'dragon leaf', drawing from its similarity to the dragon tree from the Canary Islands. The specific epithet traversii refers to William Thomas Locke Travers, a New Zealand lawyer, politician, explorer, and naturalist who lived in New Zealand from 1849.As of January 2021, the New Zealand Plant Conservation Network regards Dracophyllum pyramidale as a synonym of D. traversii. Plants of the World Online, however, regards them as separate species, D. traversii occurring in the South Island and D. pyramidale in the North Island. One 1987 study on the flora of north-west Nelson claimed the only visible difference between D. traversii and D. pyramidale was a wax on the surface of the leaves of D. traversii.D. traversii's placement within the genus Dracophyllum was first attempted by W. R. B. Oliver in a 1928 article of the Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand. Later, in 1952, he revised his work in a supplement, placing it in the subgenus Dracophyllum (referred to as Eudracophyllum) and in a group with D. latifolium, basing his research purely on morphological characteristics. In 2010 a team of several botanists, including Stephanus Venter, published an article on the genus Dracophyllum in the Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden. In it they performed a cladistic analysis and produced a phylogenetic tree of the tribe Richeeae and other species using genetic sequencing. They found that only the subgenus Oreothamnus and the tribe Richeeae were monophyletic and that there is strong genetic evidence for D. traversii's clade. The paraphylly of the genus Dracophyllum, as well as the polyphyly of the closely related genus Richea, they argued, suggested that a major taxonomic revision was required.D. traversii's current placement can be summarised in the following cladogram:


== Distribution ==
Dracophyllum traversii is endemic to New Zealand and is found in both the North and South Islands. In the North Island it can be found from Waima Forest south to Taumarunui but also stretches east to the East Cape. In the South, it is found in North-west Nelson down to Fiordland and Central Otago.


== Ecology ==

Kea feed on D. traversii during the winter, mainly eating the young foliage and shoot apices, which are also eaten by an unidentified larva. Scales in the genus Coelostomidia have been found laying their eggs under old bark and scars on leaves. The fruit, however, are almost not preyed upon at all, with only an estimated 0.01% eaten by larvae. It is commonly found in association with Libocedrus bidwillii, Phyllocladus aspleniifolius var. alpinus, Podocarpus hallii, Metrosideros umbellata, and Olearia lacunosa. Because D. traversii is deciduous the area under trees is often covered with leaf litter, in some places to 10 cm or more deep, which prohibits the growth of other plants. Typically leaves are shed when they reach the age of six years and full growth takes 2 - 3 growing seasons, with each occurring from around September to April.


== Cultivation ==
D. traversii is best propagated from seed and needs a constantly moist soil, though will likely be very slow growing and difficult to establish. It grows best in a semi-shaded area in humus and cultivation from wild specimens is not recommended as they are likely to die.


== References ==