The double-striped thick-knee (Burhinus bistriatus) is a stone-curlew, a group of waders in the family Burhinidae. The vernacular name refers to the prominent joints in the long greenish-grey legs, and bistriatus to the two stripes of the head pattern.


== Taxonomy ==
The double-striped thick-knee was formally described in 1829 by the German naturalist Johann Georg Wagler from a specimen collected in Mexico. He coined the binomial name Charadrius bistriatus. The specific epithet biscutatus combines the Latin bi- meaning "two-" or "double-" with scutatus meaning "armed with a shield" (scutum was an oblong shield). The double-striped thick-knee is now placed in the genus Burhinus that was erected by the German zoologist Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger in 1811.Four subspecies are recognised:
B. b. bistriatus (Wagler, 1829) – south Mexico to northwest Costa Rica
B. b. vocifer (L'Herminier, 1837) – Venezuela, Guyana and north Brazil
B. b. pediacus Wetmore & Borrero, 1964 – north Colombia
B. b. dominicensis (Cory, 1883) – Hispaniola


== Description ==

The double-striped thick-knee is a medium-large wader with a strong black and yellow bill, large yellow eyes, which give it a reptilian appearance, and cryptic plumage. The adult is about 46 to 50 cm (18–20 in) long and weighs about 780 to 785 g (27.5–27.7 oz). It has finely streaked grey-brown upperparts, and a paler brown neck and breast merging into the white belly. The head has a strong white supercilium bordered above by a black stripe. Juveniles are similar to adults, but have slightly darker brown upperparts and a whitish nape. The double-striped thick-knee is striking in flight, with a white patch on the dark upperwing, and a white underwing with a black rear edge.
The four subspecies differ in size and plumage tone, but individual variation makes identification of races difficult. 


== Distribution and habitat ==
It is a resident breeder in Central and South America from southern Mexico south to Colombia, Venezuela and northern Brazil. It also occurs on Hispaniola and some of the Venezuelan islands, and is a very rare vagrant to Trinidad, Curaçao and the USA. It prefers arid grassland, savanna, and other dry, open habitats. 


== Behaviour ==
This is a largely nocturnal and crepuscular species. It flies only reluctantly, relying on crouching and camouflage for concealment. The double-striped thick-knee eats large insects and other small vertebrate and invertebrate prey. It is sometimes semi-domesticated because of its useful function in controlling insects, and has benefited from the clearing of woodlands to create pasture. The song, given at night, is a loud kee-kee-kee.


=== Breeding ===
The nest is a bare scrape into which two olive-brown eggs are laid and incubated by both adults for 25–27 days to hatching. The downy young are precocial and soon leave the nest.


== References ==

ffrench, Richard (1991). A Guide to the Birds of Trinidad and Tobago (2nd ed.). Comstock Publishing. ISBN 0-8014-9792-2.
Hilty, Steven L (2003). Birds of Venezuela. London: Christopher Helm. ISBN 0-7136-6418-5.
Stiles, F. Gary; Skutch, Alexander F. (1989). A Guide to the Birds of Costa Rica. Comstock Publishing Associates. ISBN 0-8014-9600-4.
Hayman, Peter; Marchant, John; Prater, Tony (1991). Shorebirds. Christopher Helm Publishers Ltd. ISBN 978-0-395-60237-9.


== External links ==
"Double-striped thick-knee media". Internet Bird Collection.
Photo of double-striped thick-knee displaying, Photo 2; Venezuela Photo Gallery at Borderland Tours
Double-striped thick-knee photo gallery at VIREO (Drexel University)
Double-striped thick-knee species account at Neotropical Birds (Cornell Lab of Ornithology)
Interactive range map of Burhinus bistriatus at IUCN Red List maps