Apocynum androsaemifolium, the fly-trap dogbane or spreading dogbane, is a flowering plant in the Gentianales order.
The plant is common in North America, and is widespread across most of the United States and Canada, and in Alaska, California, and northeast Mexico.


== Description ==
Apocynum androsaemifolium has branching stems, hairs on the underside of the leaves, and no hair on the stems. Milky sap appears on broken stems.
Leaf margin is entire and leaf venation is alternate. Its leaves appear as pointed ovals, while its flowers appear terminally on a stalk.
The plant is poisonous due to the cardiac glycosides and resins it contains.


=== Subspecies and varieties ===
Subspecies and varieties include:
Apocynum androsaemifolium subsp. androsaemifolium - E Canada, W United States
Apocynum androsaemifolium var. griseum (Greene) Bég. & Belosersky - Ontario, British Columbia, Washington State, Oregon, Idaho, Indiana, Michigan
Apocynum androsaemifolium var. incanum A.DC. - widespread in Canada, United States, NE Mexico
Apocynum androsaemifolium var. intermedium Woodson - Colorado
Apocynum androsaemifolium subsp. pumilum (A.Gray) B.Boivin - British Columbia, Washington State, Oregon, Idaho, California, Utah, Montana, Wyoming, Nevada
Apocynum androsaemifolium var. tomentellum (Greene) B.Boivin - British Columbia, Washington State, Oregon, Idaho, California, Nevada
Apocynum androsaemifolium var. woodsonii B.Boivin - Alberta, British Columbia, Washington State, Wyoming, Nevada, Idaho


== Uses ==
Native Americans used spreading dogbane in numerous ways.  The plant was used as a medicine to treat ailments including headaches, convulsions, ear ache, heart palpitations, colds, insanity, dizziness, rheumatism, scrofula, and syphilis.  The plant can also be used as a contraceptive.  Among the Ojibwe, the root was used as a gynecological, oral, and throat aid, as well as an analgesic for headaches and a diuretic during pregnancy.  The Ojibwe also consumed the root of the plant during the medicine lodge ceremony.  The Forest Potawatomi made medicinal use of the roots as well, and the Prairie Potawatomi used the plant’s fruits to treat heart and kidney problems.  The stem fibers of the plant are very strong,. and Native Americans used them as a thread for sewing. Outside of the Americas, spreading dogbane was also used to treat heart disease in Europe during the first half of the twentieth century.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Apocynum androsaemifolium". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA.
"Apocynum androsaemifolium". Plants for a Future.
CalFlora Database, University of California: Apocynum androsaemifolium
Connecticut Plants, Connecticut Botanical SocietyMinnesota Wildflowers
Montana Plant Life
Plants of Wisconsin