The slow worm (Anguis fragilis) is a reptile native to Eurasia. It is also called a deaf adder, a slowworm, a blindworm, or regionally, a long-cripple, to distinguish it from the Peloponnese slowworm. These legless lizards are also sometimes called common slowworms. The "blind" in blindworm refers to the lizard's small eyes, similar to a blindsnake (although the slowworm's eyes are functional).
Slow worms are semifossorial (burrowing) lizards, spending much of their time hiding underneath objects. The skin of slow worms is smooth with scales that do not overlap one another. Like many other lizards, they autotomize, meaning that they have the ability to shed their tails to escape predators. While the tail regrows, it does not reach its original length. In the UK, they are common in gardens,  and can be encouraged to enter and help remove pest insects by placing black plastic or a piece of tin on the ground. On warm days, one or more slow worms can often be found underneath these heat collectors. One of the biggest causes of mortality in slow worms in suburban areas is the domestic cat, against which it has no defense.


== Taxonomy ==

Anguis fragilis was traditionally divided into two subspecies (A. f. fragilis and A. f. colchica), but they are now classified as separate species:
Anguis fragilis sensu stricto (found in western Europe, northern Europe and western Balkans) and
Anguis colchica (found in eastern Europe, eastern Balkans and in western Asia).Two more species were later distinguished from A. fragilis:

Anguis graeca (found in southern Balkans) and
Anguis veronensis (found on the Apennine Peninsula).


== Physical traits ==

These reptiles are mostly active during the twilight and occasionally bask in the sun, but are more often found hiding beneath rocks and logs. They are carnivorous and, because they feed on slugs and worms, they can often be found in long grass and other damp environments.
The females give birth to live young (ovoviviparous birth). In the days leading up to birth, the female can often be seen basking in the sun on a warm road.
Although these lizards are often mistaken for snakes, a number of features differentiate them. The most important one is that they have small eyes with eyelids that, like other lizards, blink. Unlike snakes, they may also have visible ears. They shed their skin in patches, whereas most snakes shed their  skins whole. Slow worms may also shed their tails (autotomy) as a defense mechanism, by breaking one of their tail vertebrae in half. The pattern of a slow worm's ventral scales is also different from that of a snake's.


=== Size and longevity ===
Adult slow worms grow to be about 50 cm (20") long, and are known for their exceptionally long lives; the slow worm may be the longest-living lizard, living about 30 years in the wild and up to at least 54 years in captivity (this record is held by a male slow worm that lived at the Copenhagen Zoo from 1892 until 1946, the age when first obtained is unknown). The female often has a stripe along the spine and dark sides, while the male may have blue spots dorsally. Juveniles of both sexes are gold with dark brown bellies and sides with a dark stripe along the spine.


== Protected status in the UK ==
In the United Kingdom, the slow worm has been granted protected status, alongside all other native British reptile species. The slow worm has been decreasing in numbers, and under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, to intentionally kill, injure, sell, or advertise to sell them is illegal.


== Ireland ==
The slow worm is not native to Ireland, but is believed to have been illegally introduced in the 1970s. It has been sighted only in parts of County Clare, mainly in the Burren region.


== Taxonomy ==

It was traditionally divided into four subspecies, but newly they are classified as separate species:
Anguis fragilis sensu stricto (found in western Europe, northern Europe and western Balkans),
Anguis colchica (found in eastern Europe, eastern Balkans and in western Asia),
Anguis graeca (found in southern Balkans) and
Anguis veronensis (found on the Apennine Peninsula).


== Gallery ==

		
		
		


== See also ==
Glass lizard


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Anguis fragilis at Wikimedia Commons