Calystegia sepium (hedge bindweed, Rutland beauty, bugle vine, heavenly trumpets, bellbind, granny-pop-out-of-bed and many others) is a species of flowering plant in the family Convolvulaceae. It has a subcosmopolitan distribution throughout temperate regions of the North and South hemispheres.


== Description ==
It is an herbaceous perennial that twines around other plants, in a counter-clockwise direction, to a height of up to 2–4 m (6 ft 7 in–13 ft 1 in) m, rarely 5 m. The pale matte green leaves are arranged spirally, simple, pointed at the tip and are arrowhead shaped, 5–10 cm long and 3–7 cm broad.The flowers are white, or pale pink with five darker stripes, produced from late spring to the end of summer. In the UK, between July and September. In the bud, they are covered by large green but tinged with crimson bracts which remain but scarcely overlap and do not cover the sepals of the open flower. The open flowers are trumpet-shaped, 3–7 cm diameter, white, or pale pink with white stripes. After flowering, the fruit develops as an almost spherical capsule, which is hidden by the bracts. It is 1 cm in diameter, containing two to four large, dark brown, or black seeds that are shaped like quartered oranges. 
The plant thrives in hedges, fields, borders, roadsides and open woods.


== Taxonomy ==
Other vernacular names include greater bindweed, bearbind, hedge convolvulus, hooded bindweed, old man's nightcap, wild morning glory, bride's gown, wedlock (referring to the white gown-like flowers and the binding nature of the vine), white witches hat, belle of the ball, devil's guts and hedgebell. A common childhood pastime in the UK is to 'pop' the flowers from the sepals while chanting "Granny, granny — pop out of bed".
Several regional subspecies have been described, but they are not considered distinct by all authorities:

Calystegia sepium subsp. americana. North America.
Calystegia sepium subsp. angulata. North America.
Calystegia sepium subsp. appalachiana. Eastern North America.
Calystegia sepium subsp. binghamiae. Western North America (California).
Calystegia sepium subsp. erratica. North America.
Calystegia sepium subsp. limnophila. Southern North America.
Calystegia sepium subsp. roseata. Western Europe, coasts. Flowers pink.
Calystegia sepium subsp. sepium. Europe, Asia.
Calystegia sepium subsp. spectabilis. Siberia. Flowers often pinkish.


== Eradication ==

Calystegia sepium because of its quick growth, clinging vines and broad leaves, it can overwhelm and pull down cultivated plants including shrubs and small trees. It is self-seeding (seeds can remain viable as long as 30 years) and the success of its creeping rhizomes (they can be as long as 3–4 m (10–13 ft)) cause it to be a persistent weed and have led to its classification in some American states as a noxious weed.C. sepium is highly sensitive to glyphosate, a systemic herbicide, but may need several doses to fully eradicate it.


== Similar species ==
Calystegia silvatica, giant bindweed, is sometimes treated as a subspecies of C. sepium
Convolvulus arvensis, field bindweed, is a similar vine with much smaller features. The rear margin leaf projections are sharp.
The leaves of Ipomoea pandurata, wild potato vine, are shaped like a heart, not like an arrowhead.


== Gallery ==

		


== References ==

Blanchan, Neltje (2005) [1917]. Wild Flowers Worth Knowing. Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.


== External links ==
Flora Europaea: Calystegia sepium
 The Night-Blowing Convolvulus.. One of the Flowers of Loveliness for 1838 combining an engraved picture, White Rose and Night Convolvulus, from Eliza Sharpe with a poetical illustration from Letitia Elizabeth Landon.
Species Accounts, Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland: Calystegia sepium
Oregon State Weed Guide
Ohio Perennial & Biennial Weed Guide