Juncus acutus,  the spiny rush, sharp rush or sharp-pointed rush, is a flowering plant in the monocot family Juncaceae.
It grows in salt marshes and on dunes and is reliable for reducing erosion rates.
In some countries like Australia it is considered to be an invasive weed and the spines harmful to young children.


== Synonyms ==
Juncus acutus ssp. leopoldii  (Parl.) Snog. -- Leopold's rush
Juncus acutus L. var. sphaerocarpus Engelm
Juncus acutus L. subsp. acutus
Juncus spinosus Forssk
Juncus acutus ssp. leopoldii also known as Leopold's rush is a native of Arizona, California, Georgia and Nevada.
Juncus acutus L. var. conglobatus Trautv
Juncus acutus L. var. decompositus Guss
Juncus acutus L. var. longibracteatus Buchenau


== Description ==
Juncus acutus is a brown and green 
"tussocky"perennial that can be to 1.5 metres (4.9 ft)
tall in all kinds of soils,  
in areas which go from extremes in flood and dry like dunes
or that just stay wet like lowland grassland and grassy woodland, riparian vegetation, freshwater wetland, and saline and subsaline wetlands.
Stems and leaves
Pith filled stems and leaves arise from the base at different angles giving the plant a globe shape.  The leaves form a basal sheath around the flower stem leaves and end with a stiff sharp point.
Flowers
The flower stems are 2 millimetres (0.079 in) to 4 millimetres (0.16 in) in diameter and 4 centimetres (1.6 in) to 13 centimetres (5.1 in) long and are similar to the leaves. They emerge from the base at all angles and each have 1 - 6 flowers.  Each flower has 6 stamens and 4 centimetres (1.6 in) to 25 centimetres (9.8 in) long bracts that terminate in a stiff and sharp point. The flowers are hermaphrodite and are pollinated by the wind.
Fruits and reproduction
Fruits are oval 3-celled brown capsules 4 millimetres (0.16 in) to 6 millimetres (0.24 in). The 1.2 millimetres (0.047 in) to 2 millimetres (0.079 in) long brown seeds have a tail at each end.
Roots
Short and robust rhizomes.


== Distribution ==
Found principally in low-lying damp, low fertility areas like sandy sea shores and dune slacks and coastal flats, occasionally in salt marshes and disturbed saline areas, mine dumps, lowland grassland and grassy woodland, riparian vegetation, freshwater wetland, and saline and subsaline wetlands
Palearctic:
Northern Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Morocco
Western Asia: Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey
Caucasus: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia
Northern Europe: British Isles
Southeastern Europe: Albania, Crete, Greece, Italy, Kosovo, Montenegro, Sardinia, Serbia, Sicily, Malta
Southwestern Europe: Azores, Balearic Islands, Corsica, France, Portugal, Spain
Nearctic:
Northern America: Baja California


== Community species ==
In Brazil, J. acutus has been observed on the Santa Catarina coast living in communities with:
Ipomoea pes-caprae
Hydrocotyle bonariensis
Senecio crassiflorus
In a natural shallow depression in the Murray River floodplain in South Australia:
Muehlenbeckia florulenta
Atriplex semibaccata
Halosarcia pergranulata ssp. pergranulata
Mimulus repens
Ludwigia peploides ssp. montevidensis
Phragmites australis
Paspalum vaginatum


== Chemistry ==
The dimeric phenanthrenoid 8,8'-bidehydrojuncusol and the monomeric juncusol and dehydrojuncusol can be isolated from J. acutus.


== References ==


== External links ==
UniProt. "Juncus acutus". Retrieved 2008-04-25.
Linné, Carl von; Laurentii Salvii (1753). "Juncus". Species plantarum :exhibentes plantas rite cognitas, ad genera relatas, cum differentiis specificis, nominibus trivialibus, synonymis selectis, locis natalibus, secundum systema sexuale digestas... Vol. 1. QK91.C480 1753.
Missouri Botanical Garden. "Juncus acutus L." Tropicos. Retrieved 2008-04-25.