Eriogonum nudum is a perennial shrub of the wild buckwheat genus which is known by the common name naked buckwheat or nude buckwheat.


== Description ==
The Eriogonum nudum plant is a tall, bare, leafless stem, bifurcating into more stems, each topped with rounded clusters of white or pale pink or yellow flowers growing up to six feet from a basal rosette at the ground, where the flat green leaves are located. An striking characteristic is that flower clusters typically occur at the branch as well as the branch tips.  The naked stem gives the plant its common name.


== Distribution ==
Naked buckwheat can be found scattered around the west coast of the United States. This species has one of the widest ecological distributions of all of the buckwheats. It can be found at wet coastal sea level locales and the coldest, driest elevations of the Sierra Nevada, as well as many areas in between.
The species is not uncommon, but some specific varieties are quite rare.


== Butterflies ==
Nectar-feeding insects such as butterflies are attracted to buckwheat flowers. At least one butterfly subspecies (Apodemia mormo langei) uses naked buckwheat as its primary food source.
The complex of varieties and subspecies of naked buckwheat includes:

Eriogonum nudum var. auriculatum - eared naked buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. decurrens - Ben Lomond buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. deductum
Eriogonum nudum var. indictum - protruding buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. murinum - mouse buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. nudum
Eriogonum nudum var. oblongifolium - oblong-leaved buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. paralinum - Del Norte buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum ssp. pauciflorum - few-flowered naked buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. psychicola - Antioch Dunes buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. pubiflorum - hairy-flowered buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. regirivum - Kings River buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. scapigerum
Eriogonum nudum var. westonii - Weston's buckwheat
Eriogonum nudum var. gramineu
Eriogonum nudum ssp. saxicola


== External links ==
Eriogonum nudum USDA info page
Jepson Flora Project entry
Phytologia v.89 no.3 (2007) pp 287