The yellow-bellied elaenia (Elaenia flavogaster) is a small bird of the tyrant flycatcher family. It breeds from southern Mexico and the Yucatán Peninsula through Central and South America as far as northern Argentina, and on Trinidad and Tobago.


== Description ==

Adults are 16.5 cm (6.5 in) long and weigh 24 g (0.85 oz). They have olive-brown upperparts, a white eye ring, a bushy divided crest and a white crown patch in the parting. The throat is pale and the breast greyish, with pale yellow lower underparts. The call is a nasal breeer, and the song is a wheezing zhu-zhee-zhu-zhee.


== Subspecies ==
Four subspecies are recognized:
Elaenia flavogaster subpagana – Sclater, PL, 1860: found from southeastern Mexico to Costa Rica and on Coiba Island, Panama
Elaenia flavogaster pallididorsalis – Aldrich, 1937: found in Panama
Elaenia flavogaster flavogaster – (Thunberg, 1822): nominate, found in Colombia, Venezuela, Trinidad, and the southern Lesser Antilles, the Guianas, Brazil except western and central Amazonas, southeastern Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay and northeastern Argentina
Elaenia flavogaster semipagana – Sclater, PL, 1862: found in southwestern Colombia, western and southern Ecuador and northwestern Peru


== Habitat ==
This is a common bird in semi-open woodland, scrub, gardens and cultivation. The yellow-bellied elaenia is a noisy and conspicuous bird which feeds on berries and insects. The latter are usually caught from mid-air after the bird sallies from a perch, and sometimes picked up from plants. The species will also join mixed-species feeding flocks on occasion, typically staying quite some distance up in the trees.It makes a cup nest and lays two cream eggs with reddish blotches at the larger end. The female incubates for 16 days, with about the same period to fledging. Omnivorous mammals as small as the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) will eagerly plunder yellow-bellied elaenia nests in the undergrowth—perhaps more often during the dry season when fruits are scarce—despite the birds' attempts to defend their offspring.


== Conservation status ==
The yellow-bellied elaenia is a common and wide-ranging bird, not considered threatened by the IUCN.


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
BirdLife species factsheet for Elaenia flavogaster
"Yellow-bellied elaenia media". Internet Bird Collection.
Yellow-bellied elaenia photo gallery at VIREO (Drexel University)
Yellow-bellied elaenia Stamps from Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname at bird-stamps.org
Explore Species: Yellow-bellied elaenia at eBird (Cornell Lab of Ornithology)Yellow-bellied elaenia species account at Neotropical Birds (Cornell Lab of Ornithology)
Interactive range map of Elaenia flavogaster at IUCN Red List maps
Audio recordings of Yellow-bellied elaenia on Xeno-canto.