Arctostaphylos glandulosa, with the common name Eastwood's manzanita, is a species of manzanita.


== Distribution ==
This shrub is native to the coastal slopes of western North America from Oregon through California to Baja California.


== Description ==
Arctostaphylos glandulosa is an erect shrub reaching up to 2.5 meters in height. It is bristly and sometimes glandular, secreting sticky oils. It is quite variable in appearance and there are several subspecies scattered across its range.


== Subspecies ==
Subspecies include:

Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. adamsii — Adams' manzanita: endemic to the Transverse Ranges in San Diego County and Baja California.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. crassifolia — Costa Baja manzanita, Del Mar manzanita: native to the San Diego and Baja coastlines.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. cushingiana — Cushing manzanita: native to coastal ranges, from Baja California through California to Oregon. CalFlora: subsp. cushingiana.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. gabrielensis — San Gabriel manzanita: endemic to the San Gabriel Mountains in Southern California.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. glandulosa — Eastwood's manzanita: native to coastal ranges, from Baja California through California to Oregon.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. howellii — Zaca lake manzanita: native to the Santa Lucia Range in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Countes, and Santa Barbara County
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. leucophylla — from the San Bernardino Mountains through the Peninsular Ranges of Southern California and Baja California.
Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. mollis — native to the San Bernardino Mountains, San Gabriel Mountains, Santa Monica Mountains, and Santa Ynez Mountains (Transverse Ranges) in Southern California.The rare Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. crassifolia is federally listed as an endangered species in the United States. There are about 25 remaining populations, most occurring in fragmented and degraded coastal sage scrub chaparral habitats on both sides of the border. Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. crassifolia is only known in the wild from one population near the Mill Creek Summit divide within the Angeles National Forest in the San Gabriel Mountains, and is on the California Native Plant Society Rare and Endangered Plant Inventory.


== See also ==
California chaparral and woodlands


== References ==


== External links ==
Calflora Database: Arctostaphylos glandulosa (Eastwood manzanita)
Jepson Manual eFlora (TJM2) treatment of Arctostaphylos glandulosa
USDA Plants Profile for Arctostaphylos glandulosa (Eastwood's manzanita)
U.C. Photos gallery:  Arctostaphylos glandulosa