Platanthera blephariglottis, commonly known as the white fringed orchid or white-fringed orchis, is a species of orchid of the genus Platanthera. It is considered to be an endangered species in Connecticut and Ohio, a threatened species in Florida, Maryland and Rhode Island, exploitably vulnerable in New York, and susceptible to be threatened in Québec.
Platanthera is a Greek word that means "flat" and "flower" for this use it means "wide or flat anthered", blephariglottis from  blepharis which means "eyelash" or "fringed" and glottis for "tongue."


== Description ==
Flowering from late spring until summer, Platanthera blephariglottis is an 8 to 110 centimeters (3 to 43 inches) tall plant that can be found growing in bogs and on the moist banks of lakes and rivers on the eastern side of North America.

Stem and leaves
At least 2 and often several spreading to ascending leaves scattered along the stem. Leaf shapes from linear-lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate and elliptic-lanceolate.Flowers
Dense to lax spikes of showy white flowers.  Lateral sepals bent downward and outward more than 90 degrees. Petals are near entire fringed and the shape is linear and narrows toward the point of attachment.


== Distribution ==
Often found growing in sphagnum and other acidic moss, in open wet areas in black spruce and/or tamarack bogs or on the boggy shores of lakes and in open wet meadows.
Native

Nearctic

Eastern Canada: Ontario, Quebec
Northeastern United States: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont
North-Central United States: Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin
Southeastern United States: Alabama, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia
South-Central United States: TexasSources: NRCS, WSH


== References ==


== External links ==

 Media related to Platanthera blephariglottis at Wikimedia Commons

Porter, Noah, ed. (1913). Webster's Dictionary. Springfield, Massachusetts: C. & G. Merriam Co. 
"White Fringed Orchid". Connecticut Wildflowers. Connecticut Botanical Society. 13 November 2005. Retrieved 2008-06-03.
Langdon, K. R. "A NATIVE TERRESTRIAL ORCHID, PLATANTHERA BLEPHARIGLOTTIS THE WHITE FRINGED ORCHID". Botany Circular. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. Archived from the original on 2012-12-25. Retrieved 2008-06-03.
"Platanthera blephariglottis (Willd.) Lindl. var. blephariglottis". Digital Atlas of the Virginia Flora. Virginia Botanical Associates. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2008-06-03.


== Further reading ==
Niering, W., Olmstead, N., National Audubon Society Guide to North American Wildflowers, Eastern Region,1995, plate 151 and page 655, ISBN 0-394-50432-1