The banded bullfrog (Kaloula pulchra) is a type of frog in the microhylid (narrow-mouthed frog) family. It is also known as the Asian painted frog, Malaysian painted frog, Burmese painted frog, rice frog, and bubble frog. In the pet trade, it is sometimes called the chubby frog. They have round bodies with mahogany brown backs and cream stomachs. The distinctive stripes down the side can range from copper-brown to salmon pink in color. Males have darker throats than females. Frogs grow to about 8 cm (3 in) with females generally being larger than males. They may live for as long as 10 years. Although prevalent in the pet trade, very little is known regarding its behaviour in the wild. They exude a sticky mucus when threatened, which is not toxic but has an unpleasant taste. A former subspecies in South India and Sri Lanka is now known to be a separate, related species, Uperodon taprobanicus.


== Distribution ==
This frog is native throughout mainland Southeast Asia, including eastern India, Malaysia, Bangladesh, and Myanmar, and usually lives on the forest floor, in rice fields, and even inside homes. These frogs are voracious eaters, and will eat flies, crickets, moths, grasshoppers, earthworms and more. Painted frogs hide under leaf litter during the day hours and eat in the evening.
Like many other narrow-mouthed frogs, painted frogs have the ability to expand themselves when threatened, and to secrete toxic glue-like substances from their bodies as a defense mechanism. They are also able to survive dry conditions by burying themselves in the ground and waiting for rain.


== Invasive species ==
The species is a potential invasive species. It has been introduced through both the pet trade and maritime transport, and has become established in Taiwan, the Philippines, Guam, Singapore, Borneo and Sulawesi with specimens noted in Australia and New Zealand. An invasive population was observed in Florida in 2006 and later in 2011, likely through the pet trade; however, the invasive population is under control. In 2005 this frog was observed at an airport in Perth, and at a cargo port in New Zealand, but no established invasive population has been found in either Australia or New Zealand.


== Behaviour ==

In India, the frogs call after the first heavy monsoon showers in April–May. The males call while afloat in pools of water. The pulses of the calls recorded in India were 28–56 per second with a frequency range of 50–1760 Hz. In Thailand the dominant frequency was 250 Hz (duration 560–600 ms long) and 18–21 pulses/call.The tadpoles can metamorphose in as little as two weeks.


== Diet ==
These frogs are big eaters and are very slow. They are primarily ant specialists, consuming up to a couple hundred ants in one night, and can often be found sitting along an ant trail picking off individuals one by one. Mealworms can be fed once a week or so if one Asian Painted Frog is kept at home, but should not make up most of its diet. They can be used as a laxative.


== Pet trade ==
Chubby Frogs are commonly sold in pet stores. They are sensitive to chlorine in water. They are maintained in aquariums with substrate choices consisting of peat–soil mixes or potting soil with sphagnum moss. They need high humidity and prefer temperatures of 80–85 °F (27–29 °C).


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Kaloula pulchra at Wikimedia Commons
Amphibian and Reptiles of Peninsular Malaysia - Kaloula pulchra Archived 2011-07-22 at the Wayback Machine