Symphyotrichum novae-angliae (formerly Aster novae-angliae) is a species of flowering plant in the family Asteraceae native to eastern North America. Commonly known as New England aster, hairy Michaelmas-daisy, or Michaelmas daisy, it is a perennial, herbaceous plant usually between 3 and 12 decimeters (1 and 4 feet) tall and 6 to 9 dm (2 to 3 ft) wide.
The usually deep-purple flowers have up to 100 ray florets which are rarely pink or white. These surround the flower centers which are composed of just as many tiny yellow disk florets. The plant grows in clumps, with several erect stems emerging from a single point. The stems are stout, hairy, and mostly unbranched. The untoothed, lance-shaped leaves clasp the stem with earlobe-like appendages, and the lower stem leaves often wither by the time of flowering.
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae generally grows in wet environments but also has been found in dry soil or sand. The seeds and nectar of this mostly conservationally secure species, which blooms August to November, are important to a wide variety of animals, including birds, bees, and butterflies. It has been introduced to Europe, Central Asia, Hispaniola, New Zealand, and some western states and provinces of North America.
The naturally-occurring hybrid species of New England aster and white heath aster (Symphyotrichum ericoides) is named Symphyotrichum x amethystinum and is commonly known as amethyst aster. It can grow where the two parents are in close proximity. There are roughly 50 cultivars available, including the award-winners 'Brunswick', 'Helen Picton', and 'James Ritchie'. Symphyotrichum novae-angliae has been used by indigenous Americans such as the Cherokee, Iroquois, and Potawatomi to heal multiple ailments.


== Description ==
New England aster is a perennial, herbaceous plant usually between 3 and 12 decimeters (1 and 4 feet) tall, but sometimes reaching heights of 18 to 24 dm (6 to 8 ft), and is usually 6 to 9 dm (2 to 3 ft) wide. It is cespitose, with several erect stems emerging from a single point. The stems are stout and mostly unbranched. The stems, leaves, and some parts of the flower heads are covered with tiny glands on tiny stalks called "stipitate glands".


=== Leaves ===
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae has light to dark green, thin, and often stiff alternate and simple leaves. These occur at the base, on stems, and on the flower head branches which all have generally the same lanceolate appearance regardless of their location on the plant. The exception to this is the basal (bottom) leaves, which are usually spatulate or sometimes oblanceolate in shape. The lower stem leaves often wither or drop by the time the plant flowers.The leaf margins are sometimes entire, meaning they are smooth on the edges with no teeth or lobes, or ciliate, meaning they may have small teeth on their edges. They are sessile, having no leafstalk, and they are auriculate, clasping the stem with earlobe-like appendages.

The leaves can vary in size, with the basal and distal (highest) leaves usually smaller than those occurring mid-stem. The basal leaves are sparsely hairy and range 2–6 cm (4⁄5–2+2⁄5 in) long by 5–15 mm (1⁄5–3⁄5 in) wide. Stem leaves are generally lanceolate or oblong with pointed tips and have stipitate glands on both sides. They average 5–10 cm (2–4 in) long by 5–20 mm (1⁄5–4⁄5 in) wide. The distal leaves are oblanceolate, also stipitate-glandular, and softly-pubescent. Sizes of the distal leaves range 3–8 cm (1–3 in) long by 6–15 mm (1⁄4–3⁄5 in) wide.


=== Flowers ===

Symphyotrichum novae-angliae is a late-summer and fall blooming perennial with flower heads opening as early as August in some locations and as late as November in others. The inflorescences grow in paniculo-corymbiform arrays, also called "cymose corymbs". These inflorescences have many leaves and are quite crowded, typically with one head at the end of each small branch. Each open flower head is wide and can be up to 5 cm (2 in) in diameter.


==== Involucres and phyllaries ====
On the outside the flower heads of all members of the family Asteraceae are small specialized leaves called "phyllaries", and together they form the involucre that protects the individual flowers in the head before they open. The involucres of Symphyotrichum novae-angliae are campanulate (bell-shaped) to hemispheric (half-spherical) and usually 7–9 mm (3⁄10–7⁄20 in) long. The phyllaries are spreading and often reflexed and are covered with stipitate glands. They are in 3–5 (sometimes up to 6) somewhat equal rows.


==== Florets ====
Each flower head is made up of ray florets and disk florets in about a one to one (1:1) ratio, with the former accepting pollen before, and longer than, the latter. The 40–100 ray florets grow in one, two, or multiple series and are usually deep purple, rarely pink or white. They average 1–2 cm (2⁄5–4⁄5 in) long and 0.8–1.3 mm (3⁄100–1⁄20 in) wide. Ray florets in the Symphyotrichum genus are exclusively female, each having a pistil (with style, stigma, and ovary) but no stamen; thus, ray florets accept pollen and each can develop a seed, but they produce no pollen.The disks have 50–110 florets that start out as yellow and later turn purple. Each disk floret is 4.5–5.5 mm (1⁄6–5⁄24 in) in depth and is made up of 5 fused petals, collectively a corolla, which open into 5 lobes. Disk florets in the Symphyotrichum genus are bisexual, each with both male (stamen, anthers, and filaments) and female reproductive parts; thus, a disk floret produces pollen and can develop a seed.


=== Fruit ===
The fruits of Symphyotrichum novae-angliae are seeds, not true achenes but cypselae, resembling an achene but surrounded by a calyx sheath. This is true for all members of the Asteraceae family. After pollination, they become dull purple or brown with an oblong or obconic shape, are uncompressed, and are 1.8–3 mm (1⁄20–1⁄10 in) long and 0.6–1 mm (1⁄50–1⁄25 in) wide with 7–10 nerves. They also have tufts of hairs called "pappi" which are tawny or rose-tinged in color and 4.5–6 mm (1⁄6–1⁄4 in) long.


=== Chromosomes ===
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae is diploid with a chromosome base number of x = 5 (2n = 10).


== Taxonomy ==
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae was formerly included in the large genus Aster as Aster novae-angliae. However, this broad circumscription of Aster is polyphyletic, and the North American asters are now mostly classified in Symphyotrichum and several other genera. S. novae-angliae is classified in the subgenus Virgulus, section Polyliguli.Several forms of this species have been described, differing in flower color, but these are not recognized in most sources.The vernacular name Michaelmas-daisy derives from the various asters, including this species, that tend to flower around September 29, the Feast of St. Michael.


=== Hybrids ===
Hybridization with Symphyotrichum ericoides can occur where the ranges of these two species overlap. Named Symphyotrichum × amethystinum (amethyst aster), it is intermediate between the parent species in most respects. No other hybrids with S. novae-angliae have been recorded.


== Distribution and habitat ==


=== Distribution ===


==== Native ====
New England aster is native to most of the central and northeastern United States and southeastern Canada, from Manitoba south to Louisiana and east to Maine. It is absent from much of the far southeastern United States and from boreal regions in North America. There are isolated populations to the west of the main range, such as in New Mexico and in the Black Hills of South Dakota.


==== Introduced ====
Due to widespread cultivation, introduced populations are present elsewhere in North America and in other parts of the world. In North America, this includes Nova Scotia, Montana, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Wyoming, and likely elsewhere. It is widely naturalized throughout most of Europe, in parts of Central Asia, on the island of Hispaniola, and in the island country of New Zealand.


=== Habitat ===
S. novae-angliae is found in a wide variety of open, typically moist habitats, including meadows, prairies, marshes, fens, forest edges, and disturbed anthropogenic sites, such as roadsides and former agricultural fields. In its native habitat, it grows primarily in moist calcareous soils, favoring more marshy-wet sites in the western-most of its range. It is categorized on the United States National Wetland Plant List (NWPL) with the Wetland Indicator Status Rating of Facultative Wetland (FACW) in all wetland regions, meaning it usually occurs in wetlands, but not out of necessity. For example, in one northern location, the Niagara Peninsula in southern Ontario, it was found to grow in dry and sandy soils. It grows best in soils with a pH of 5–7.


== Ecology ==

Symphyotrichum novae-angliae has coefficients of conservatism (C-values) in the Floristic Quality Assessment (FQA) that range from 0 to 8 depending on evaluation region. The lower the C-value, the higher tolerance the species has for disturbance and the lesser the likelihood that it is growing in a presettlement natural community. In the Dakotas, for example, S. novae-angliae has a C-value of 8, meaning its populations there are found in high-quality remnant natural areas with little environmental degradation but can tolerate some periodic disturbance. In contrast, in the Atlantic coastal pine barrens of Massachusetts, New York, and Rhode Island, it has been given a C-value of 1, meaning its presence in locations of that ecoregion provides little or no confidence of a remnant habitat.


=== Reproduction ===
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae reproduces vegetatively via short rhizomes, as well as via wind-dispersed seeds. The species is largely incapable of self-pollination and requires cross-pollination for seed production. The seeds are an important fall and winter food source for songbirds.The ray florets of species in the Symphyotrichum genus are exclusively female, each having a pistil but no stamen, while disk florets are bisexual, each with both male and female reproductive parts. Asteraceae ovaries are called "inferior" because each has one ovule and can therefore produce one seed.Inside the disk corolla is the pollen-producing stamen whose filaments are fused to the corolla. The five anthers are fused together to form a cylinder, or tube, with their pollen on the inside only. This anther cylinder surrounds the stigma with style at the tip. The style has two lobes, or pieces, that are initially fused together making the ovary inaccessible. As the stigma is maturing, it elongates up through the anther cylinder, gathering the pollen on the style along the way.At the bottom of the stigma is the disk floret ovary. The disk floret's stigma remains closed while pollen remains on the style, but after it has been collected and carried off, the style begins to split, opening so that the disk floret ovary becomes accessible to receive pollen from another plant. Pollination of the ray floret is similar, but there is no stamen with filament or anthers that require pollen collection.


=== Pollinators and nectar-seekers ===
A wide variety of generalist nectar-feeding insects visit Symphyotrichum novae-angliae, including butterflies, moths, ants, flies, and bees. It is heavily visited by long-tongued bumblebees like the golden northern bumble bee (Bombus fervidus) and the half-black bumblebee (Bombus vagans), and less so by short-tongued species. Some bees will collect pollen in addition to nectar, such as the broad-handed leafcutter bee (Megachile latimanus) and Drury's long-horned bee (Melissodes druriellus).


=== Pests and diseases ===
A gall midge insect, Rhopalomyia astericaulis, produces a 2 cm (3⁄4 in) stem gall on this species. Leaf-mining insects include beetles (Sumitrosis inaequalis, Systena hudsonias. and Microrhopala xerene) and flies (Agromyza curvipalpis, Agromyza platypera, Napomyza lateralis, and Phytomyza albiceps).Butterflies known to feed on New England aster as caterpillars include the Gorgone checkerspot (Chlosyne gorgone) and pearl crescent (Phyciodes tharos). The warty leaf beetle Exema canadensis breeds on S. novae-angliae.Fungi known to affect the species include the mildews Basidiophora entospora (downy) and Erysiphe cichoracearum (powdery), and a black knot fungus Gibberidea heliopsidis. Leaf spot fungi include Discosphaerina pseudhimantia and Placosphaeria haydeni (both making black spots), as well as Ramularia asteris, R. macrospora, and Septoria atropurpurea, the latter making purple stains.Two rusts have been recorded on S. novae-angliae: the brown rust Puccinia asteris and the red rust Coleosporium asterum.


== Conservation ==
As of July 2021, NatureServe listed Symphyotrichum novae-angliae as Secure (G5) worldwide; Possibly Extirpated (SX) in Oklahoma; Critically Imperiled (S1) in Saskatchewan, Georgia, South Carolina, and Wyoming; Imperiled (S2) in Colorado; and, Vulnerable (S3) in North Carolina.


== Uses ==


=== Medicinal ===
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae has been used for various medicinal purposes. In his 1828 Medical Flora, botanist Constantine Samuel Rafinesque wrote the following about its use to treat skin eruptions, including urushiol-induced contact dermatitis from poison ivy and poison sumac:The A. novanglia is employed in decoction internally, with a strong decoction externally, in many eruptive diseases of the skin: it removes also the poisonous state of the skin caused by Rhus or Shumac.
Among indigenous people in North America, it has been documented that the Cherokee have made a poultice of the roots for pain, an infusion of the roots for diarrhea, an infusion of the plant for fever, and have sniffed the ooze from the roots for catarrh.Both the Meskwaki and the Potawatomi have used the plant to revive people: the Meskwaki by smudging, and the Potawatomi through fumigation. The Iroquois have made a decoction of the plant for weak skin and of the roots and leaves for fevers. They have used the plant as a love medicine. Both the Mohawk people and the Iroquois have used an infusion of whole plant in combination with rhizomes from another plant to treat mothers with intestinal fevers. The Chippewa have smoked the root in pipes to attract game.


=== Gardening ===

Over 70 cultivars have been developed, and about 50 survive in commerce today.  The S. novae-angliae cultivars grow to between 9 and 20 decimeters (3 and 6+1⁄2 feet) in height, with the notable exception of 'Purple Dome', at 4.5 dm (1+1⁄2 ft). Long popular in Europe, where it was introduced into cultivation in 1710, New England aster has only more recently become commonly cultivated in North America.Eleven cultivars have received the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit (AGM) as of December 2020, including 'Brunswick' (bright pink), 'Helen Picton' (purple), 'James Ritchie' (deep pink), and 'Rosa Sieger' (rose-pink).


== Notes ==


== Citations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Asteraea Lab - University of Waterloo
New England Aster at Illinois Wildflowers
New England Aster at Ontario Wildflowers
New England Aster at Minnesota Wildflowers
Symphyotrichum novae-angliae at Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center, wildflower.org