The red-rimmed melania, scientific name Melanoides tuberculata, is a species of freshwater snail with an operculum, a parthenogenetic, aquatic gastropod mollusk in the family Thiaridae.
The common name comes from the presence of reddish spots on the otherwise greenish-brown shell.The species name is sometimes spelled Melanoides tuberculatus, but this is incorrect because Melanoides Olivier, 1804 was clearly intended to be feminine because it was combined with the feminine specific epithet fasciolata in the original description.This species is native to northern Africa and southern Asia, but it has been accidentally introduced in many other tropical and subtropical areas worldwide. It has also been accidentally introduced to heated aquaria in colder parts of the world.


== Shell description ==

This species has an elongate, conical shell, which is usually light brown, marked with rust-colored spots. An operculum is present.  In some places, such as in Israel, the shells are colored in black or dark brown, probably to help conceal the snail on the background of the basalt rocks of the Sea of Galilee (Kinnereth).The average shell length is about 20–27 mm or 30–36 mm, but exceptional specimens may be up to 80 mm long. Shells of this species have 10–15 whorls.


== Distribution ==

This species is native to subtropical and tropical northern Africa and southern Asia.
in Africa
Algeria, Burundi, The Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Libya, Malawi, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger,
South Africa (Eastern Cape Province, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo Province)
Senegal, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zimbabwe.in Asia
Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India (including Andaman Islands), Israel of Japan, Laos, Malaysia (Peninsular Malaysia), Nepal, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Vietnam
ThailandPrehistoric localities include Gobero in Niger in 6200–5200 BCE.


=== Nonindigenous distribution ===
Cuba
United States since the 1930s (see below)
Latin America in the late 1960s
Brazil - since 1967 (Ilha Grande in Rio de Janeiro in southeastern Brazil since 2004)
Netherlands - before 1990
New Zealand
VenezuelaDominica
Trinidad
and othersThis species can also be found in artificially-heated indoor habitats, such as aquaria in greenhouses, and similar biotopes:

Czech Republic
Germany
Great Britain
Slovakia - thermal brook in the wild.
and others


=== Nonindigenous distribution in the United States ===
This species has become established outside of its natural range in large part through the activities of aquarists. These snails were imported to the United States by the aquarium trade as early as the 1930s. Established populations exist from Florida to Texas, and the species may still be expanding its range in the West and Northeast.Some of these exotic populations have become very large, with densities of 10,000 per square metre being reported from the St. Johns River in Florida. In some cases red-rimmed melanias are believed to have a negative impact on native snail populations.The nonindigenous distribution includes the United States: Arizona; San Francisco Bay, California; Colorado; Florida; Hawai'i; Louisiana; Montana; North Carolina; Nevada; Oregon; Utah; Texas, and Fall River County in South Dakota, (Unconfirmed in Virginia, and Wyoming.)


== Ecology ==
This is primarily a burrowing species that tends to be most active at night.


=== Habitat ===
Although normally a freshwater snail, this species is very tolerant of brackish water, and has been recorded in waters with a salinity of 32.5 ppt (1,024 specific gravity salinity).
It is however a warm-climate species. It appears to prefer a temperature range of 18 to 25 °C or of 18 to 32 °C. Research has been conducted to determine the snail's lethal high water temperature, which is about 50 °C (120 degrees Fahrenheit). This information is helpful in the disinfection of fishing gear and research equipment, which otherwise may inadvertently spread the snails to uninfested waters.This species is resistant to low oxygen levels. The pollution tolerance value is 3 (on scale 0–10; 0 is the best water quality, 10 is the worst water quality).


=== Feeding habits ===
This snail feeds primarily on algae (microalgae).


=== Life cycle ===
Red-rimmed melania females are both parthenogenic and ovoviparous. Females can be recognized by their greenish coloured gonads while males have reddish gonads. Under good conditions, females will produce fertilised eggs that are transferred to a brood pouch where they remain until they hatch (parthenogenesis and viviparity). Melanoides tuberculata has 1–64 embryos in its brood pouch. Snails will begin reproducing at a size as small as 5 mm or 10 mm in length and broods may contain over seventy offspring (iteroparity). The size of the shell of the parent at peak release of juveniles is 20.0 mm. The size of juveniles at birth is 1.2-2.2 mm.Melanoides tuberculata grows to a similar size as Tarebia granifera, are similar in size at first birth and juvenile output.It is a r-strategist species.


=== Parasites ===
Melanoides tuberculata is known to carry certain parasites which can be dangerous to humans. Pinto & de Melo (2011) compiled a checklist of 37 species of trematode parasites from this species of snail. Eleven of those trematodes are also parasites of human. These snails serve as first intermediate host for parasites which include:
Clonorchis sinensis - Chinese liver fluke
Centrocestus formosanus
Paragonimus westermani - Oriental lung fluke
Paragonimus kellicotti
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Loxogenoides bicolor
Transversotrema laruei
Sticiodora tridactyl
Gastrodiscus aegyptiacus
Philophthalmus gralli
Philophthalmus distomatosa
Haplorchis pumilio
Haplorchis sp.
Metagonimus
Diorchitrema formosanum
unknown species in SchistosomatidaeThis species is a host for a trematode parasite which has been found to infect an endangered species of fish in Texas, the fountain darter.


== Agricultural pests ==
Red-rimmed melanias can sometimes be an agricultural pest species, as has been reported on Chinese cabbage plantations in Hong Kong.


== Aquaria ==

Red-rimmed melanias are quite commonly found in freshwater aquaria, but opinion in the hobby is divided between those who see them as a pest species, and those who value their usefulness as algae-eaters and substrate-cleaners. Among aquarists, these snails are known as Malayan livebearing snails or Malayan/Malaysian trumpet snails (often abbreviated to MTS).


== See also ==
List of introduced molluscs species of Venezuela


== References ==
This article incorporates public domain text from references 


== Further reading ==
Mitchell, A. J.; Brandt, T. M. (2005). "Temperature Tolerance of Red-Rim Melania Melanoides tuberculatus, an Exotic Aquatic Snail Established in the United States". Transactions of the American Fisheries Society. 134: 126–131. doi:10.1577/FT03-178.1.
Bogéa, T.; Cordeiro, F. M.; Gouveia, J. S. (2005). "Melanoides tuberculatus (Gastropoda: Thiaridae) as intermediate host of Heterophyidae (Trematoda: Digenea) in Rio de Janeiro metropolitan area, Brazil". Revista do Instituto de Medicina Tropical de Sao Paulo. 47 (2): 87–90. doi:10.1590/s0036-46652005000200005. PMID 15880219.
Krailas, Duangduen; Namchote, Suluck; Koonchornboon, Tunyarut; Dechruksa, Wivitchuta; Boonmekam, Dusit (2014). "Trematodes obtained from the thiarid freshwater snail Melanoides tuberculata (Müller, 1774) as vector of human infections in Thailand". Zoosystematics and Evolution. 90 (1): 57–86. doi:10.3897/zse.90.7306. ISSN 1860-0743.interactions with Biomphalaria glabrata:

Pointier J. P. (1993). "The introduction of Melanoides tuberculata (Mollusca: Thiaridae) to the island of Saint Lucia (West Indies) and its role in the decline of Biomphalaria glabrata, the snail intermediate host of Schistosoma mansoni". Acta Trop. 54:13-18.
Giovanelli A., Vieira M. V. & da Silva C. L. P. A. C. (2002) "Interaction between the Intermediate Host of Schistosomiasis in Brazil Biomphalaria glabrata (Planorbidae) and a Possible Competitor Melanoides tuberculata (Thiaridae): I. Laboratory Experiments." Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 97(3): 363-369. PDF
Giovanelli, A.; Vieira, M. V.; Coelho Da Silva, C. L. P. A. (2005). "Interaction Between the Intermediate Host of Schistosomiasis in Brazil, Biomphalaria Glabrata (Say, 1818) and a Possible Competitor, Melanoides Tuberculata (Muller, 1774): A Field Study". Journal of Molluscan Studies. 71: 7–13. doi:10.1093/mollus/eyi004.


== External links ==