The Western Kingbird (Tyrannus verticalis) is a large tyrant flycatcher found throughout western environments of North America and as far as Mexico.

Adults are a combination of both gray and yellow plumage along with a crimson feathers that are hidden until courtship females or against intruders. Characteristic of other kingbirds, the western kingbird is very territorial, although the western is often misidentified with Cassin's Kingbird, Couch's kingbird, and the tropical kingbird due to the yellow coloration. The species can be distinguished among these species through its black squared tail with white outer lining.


== Anatomy and Morphology ==


== Distribution and Habitat ==
Their breeding habitat is open areas in western North America. The increase in trees throughout the Great Plains during the past century due to fire suppression and tree planting facilitated the range expansion of the western kingbird as well as range expansions of many other species of birds.


== Behavior ==
The name kingbird is derived from their "take-charge" behavior. These birds aggressively defend their territory, even against much larger birds such as hawks. They will attack humans, livestock, and pets when they think their young are in danger. Kingbirds make a sturdy cup nest in a tree or shrub, sometimes on top of a pole or other man-made structure. Three to five eggs, white, creamy, or pinkish with heavy blotches of brown, black, or lavender, are laid and incubated for 12 to 14 days.Due to the small size of the nest, and the chicks' rapid rate of growth, most of them are pushed out of the nest, due to overcrowding, before they are fully feathered and able to fly. These birds migrate in flocks to Florida and the Pacific coast of southern Mexico and Central America.
They wait on an open perch and fly out to catch insects such as bees, robber flies, winged ants, and grasshoppers, and spiders. They are also known to eat berries, buckthorn/sumac, and poison ivy seeds.


== Sound ==
The song is a squeaky chatter, sometimes compared to a squeaky toy. The call is a sharp loud whit. It occasionally sings before sunrise.


== References ==


== External links ==
Western kingbird Species account - Cornell Lab of Ornithology
Western kingbird - Tyrannus verticalis - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter
Western kingbird attacking red tailed hawk with photo - Denver Post, 30 September 2009
BirdLife species factsheet for Tyrannus verticalis
"Tyrannus verticalis". Avibase. 
"Western kingbird media". Internet Bird Collection.
Western kingbird photo gallery at VIREO (Drexel University)
Interactive range map of Tyrannus verticalis at IUCN Red List maps
Audio recordings of Western kingbird on Xeno-canto.
Western kingbird Life History - All About Birds