Solidago virgaurea, the European goldenrod or woundwort, is an herbaceous perennial plant of the family Asteraceae. It is widespread across most of Europe as well as North Africa and northern, central, and southwestern Asia (China, Russia, India, Turkey, Kazakhstan, etc.). It is grown as a garden flower with many different cultivars. It flowers profusely in late summer.
Solidago virgaurea is a perennial herb up to 100 cm (40 inches) tall, with a branching underground caudex and a woody rhizome. It produces arrays of numerous small yellow flower heads at the top of the stem.
Subspecies and varietiesSolidago virgaurea subsp. alpestris (Waldst. & Kit.) Gremli
Solidago virgaurea subsp. armena (Grossh.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. asiatica Kitam. ex Hara
Solidago virgaurea var. calcicola Fernald
Solidago virgaurea subsp. caucasica (Kem.-Nath.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. dahurica (Kitag.) Kitag.
Solidago virgaurea subsp. gigantea (Nakai) Kitam.
Solidago virgaurea var. insularis (Kitam.) Hara
Solidago virgaurea subsp. jailarum (Juz.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. lapponica (With.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. macrorrhiza (Lange) Nyman
Solidago virgaurea subsp. minuta (L.) Arcang.
Solidago virgaurea subsp. stenophylla (G.E.Schultz) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. talyschensis (Tzvelev) Sennikov
Solidago virgaurea subsp. taurica (Juz.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. turfosa (Woronow ex Grossh.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. virgaurea
Solidago virgaurea var. virgaurea


== Medicinal uses ==
In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries Solidago virgaurea was used in Europe to heal wounds. Its astringent, diuretic, antiseptic and other properties are well known. In various assessments by the European Medicines Agency with respect to Solidago virgaurea, non-clinical data shows diuretic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, analgesic and spasmolytic, antibacterial, antifungal, anticancer and immunomodulatory activity. However, as no single ingredient is responsible for these effects, the whole herbal preparation of ‘’Solidago’’ inflorescences must be considered as the active ingredient.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Solidago virgaurea". Plants for a Future.