Ipomoea quamoclit (cypress vine, cypressvine morning glory, cardinal creeper, cardinal vine, star glory or hummingbird vine) is a species of vine in the genus Ipomoea native to tropical regions of the New World and naturalized elsewhere in the tropics.


== Description ==
It is an annual or perennial, herbaceous, twining vine growing 3–10 feet (0.91–3.05 m) tall. The leaves are 1–4 inches (25–102 mm) long, deeply lobed (nearly pinnate), with 9-19 lobes on each side of the leaf. The flowers are 1–2 inches (25–51 mm) long and 1 inch (25 mm) in diameter, trumpet-shaped with five points, and can be red, pink or white.


== Distribution and habitat ==
Native from northern South America north to Mexico.


== Vernacular names ==
I. quamoclit has various names throughout the country of India. In southern India, it is called mayil manikkam in Tamil: மயில் மாணிக்கம். In Malayalam, it is called ākāśamulla. In Assamese it is known as Kunjalata (কুঞ্জলতা), while in the Marathi language it is known as Ganesh Vel. In Bangladesh, it has the vernacular names Tarulata,  Kamalata, Kunjalata and Getphul. In Urdu-speaking areas, particularly around the Awadh region, it is known as Ishq Pecha (इश्क़ पेंचा).
In Telugu, it is called 'Kasiratnam'. In Mizo, it is called 'Rimenhawih'. In Jamaica, it is called 'Indian creeper'.


== Cultivation and uses ==
It is widely cultivated as an ornamental plant throughout the tropics, and also outside of tropical regions, where it is grown as an annual plant only, not surviving temperate zone winters. In some tropical areas, it has become naturalized.
It flowers in summer and fall. Its seeds are sown in rainy season. It blooms continuously from August to December in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere and February to June in temperate regions of the Southern Hemisphere.
Seedlings must always be kept moist. They require full sun for good growth. This vine is one of the best plants for attracting hummingbirds, and is a vigorous grower.  In warmer climates, this plant can be extremely invasive.
It doesn't require any fertilizer and gives blooms without any care. It can be grown anywhere... In containers along with other plants, it can be grown in small containers, or in big containers it thrives well in small spaces and big spaces alike.
Ipomoea × multifida is a hybrid between I. quamoclit (the cypress vine) and I. coccinea. The allotetraploid of this hybrid is Ipomoea sloteri. Both are known as cardinal climber.

		
		
		


== References ==


== External links ==