Oxalis ( (American English) or  (British English)) is a large genus of flowering plants in the wood-sorrel family Oxalidaceae, comprising about 570 species. The genus occurs throughout most of the world, except for the polar areas; species diversity is particularly rich in tropical Brazil, Mexico and South Africa.
Many of the species are known as wood sorrels (sometimes written "woodsorrels" or "wood-sorrels") as they have an acidic taste reminiscent of the sorrel proper (Rumex acetosa), which is only distantly related. Some species are called yellow sorrels or pink sorrels after the color of their flowers instead. Other species are colloquially known as false shamrocks, and some called sourgrasses. For the genus as a whole, the term oxalises is also used.


== Description and ecology ==

These plants are annual or perennial. The leaves are divided into three to ten or more obovate and top notched leaflets, arranged palmately with all the leaflets of roughly equal size. The majority of species have three leaflets; in these species, the leaves are superficially similar to those of some clovers. Some species exhibit rapid changes in leaf angle in response to temporarily high light intensity to decrease photoinhibition.The flowers have five petals, which are usually fused at the base, and ten stamens. The petal color varies from white to pink, red or yellow; anthocyanins and xanthophylls may be present or absent but are generally not both present together in significant quantities, meaning that few wood-sorrels have bright orange flowers. The fruit is a small capsule containing several seeds. The roots are often tuberous and succulent, and several species also  reproduce vegetatively by production of bulbils, which detach to produce new plants.

Several Oxalis species dominate the plant life in local woodland ecosystems, be it 
Coast Range ecoregion of the North American Pacific Northwest, or the Sydney Turpentine-Ironbark Forest in southeastern Australia where least yellow sorrel (O. exilis) is common. In the United Kingdom and neighboring Europe, common wood sorrel (O. acetosella) is the typical woodland member of this genus, forming large swaths in the typical mixed deciduous forests dominated by downy birch (Betula pubescens) and sessile oak (Quercus petraea), by sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus), common bracken (Pteridium aquilinum), pedunculate oak (Q. robur) and blackberries (Rubus fruticosus agg.), or by common ash (Fraxinus excelsior), dog's mercury (Mercurialis perennis) and European rowan (Sorbus aucuparia); it is also common in woods of common juniper (Juniperus communis ssp. communis). Some species – notably Bermuda-buttercup (O. pes-caprae) and creeping woodsorrel (O. corniculata) – are pernicious, invasive weeds when escaping from cultivation outside their native ranges; the ability of most wood-sorrels to store reserve energy in their tubers makes them quite resistant to most weed control techniques.
Tuberous woodsorrels provide food for certain small herbivores – such as the Montezuma quail (Cyrtonyx montezumae). The foliage is eaten by some Lepidoptera, such as the Polyommatini pale grass blue (Pseudozizeeria maha) – which feeds on creeping wood sorrel and others – and dark grass blue (Zizeeria lysimon).
Oxalis species are susceptible to rust (Puccinia oxalidis).


== Use by humans ==


=== As food ===
Wood sorrel (a type of oxalis) is an edible wild plant that has been consumed by humans around the world for millennia.  In Dr. James Duke's Handbook of Edible Weeds, he notes that the Native American Kiowa people chewed wood sorrel to alleviate thirst on long trips, the Potawatomi cooked it with sugar to make a dessert, the Algonquin considered it an aphrodisiac, the Cherokee ate wood sorrel to alleviate mouth sores and a sore throat, and the Iroquois ate wood sorrel to help with cramps, fever and nausea.

The fleshy, juicy edible tubers of the oca (O. tuberosa) have long been cultivated for food in Colombia and elsewhere in the northern Andes mountains of South America. It is grown and sold in New Zealand as "New Zealand yam" (although not a true yam), and varieties are now available in yellow, orange, apricot, and pink, as well as the traditional red-orange.The leaves of scurvy-grass sorrel (O. enneaphylla) were eaten by sailors travelling around Patagonia as a source of vitamin C to avoid scurvy.
In India, creeping wood sorrel (O. corniculata) is eaten only seasonally, starting in December–January. The Bodos of north east India sometimes prepare a sour fish curry with its leaves. The leaves of common wood sorrel (O. acetosella) may be used to make a lemony-tasting tea when dried.


=== For its oxalic acid content ===

A characteristic of members of this genus is that they contain oxalic acid (whose name references the genus), giving the leaves and flowers a sour taste which can make them refreshing to chew.  The crude calcium oxalate ranges from 13 to 25 mg/g fresh weight for woodsorrel as compared to 1.3 to 1.8 mg/g for spinach. In very large amounts, oxalic acid may be considered slightly toxic, interfering with proper digestion and kidney function.  However, oxalic acid is also present in more commonly consumed foods such as spinach, broccoli, brussels sprouts, grapefruit, chives, and rhubarb, among many others.   General scientific consensus seems to be that the risk of sheer toxicity, actual poisoning from oxalic acid in persons with normal kidney function is "wildly unlikely".While any oxalic acid-containing plant, such as Oxalis, is toxic to humans in some dosage, the U.S. National Institutes of Health note that oxalic acid is present in many foodstuffs found in the supermarket and its toxicity is generally of little or no consequence for people who eat a variety of foods.In the past, it was a practice to extract crystals of calcium oxalate for use in treating diseases and as a salt called sal acetosella or "sorrel salt" (also known as "salt of lemon"). Growing oca tuber root caps are covered in a fluorescent slush rich in harmaline and harmine which apparently suppresses pests. Creeping wood sorrel and perhaps other species are apparently hyperaccumulators of copper. The Ming Dynasty text Precious Secrets of the Realm of the King of Xin from 1421 describes how O. corniculata can be used to locate copper deposits as well as for geobotanical prospecting. It thus ought to have some potential for phytoremediation of contaminated soils.


== As ornamental plants ==

Several species are grown as pot plants or as ornamental plants in gardens, for example, O. versicolor.
Oxalis flowers range in colour from whites to yellows, peaches, pinks, or multi-coloured flowers.Some varieties have double flowers, for example the double form of O. compressus.  Some varieties are grown for their foliage, such as the dark purple-leaved O. triangularis.
Species with four regular leaflets – in particular O. tetraphylla (four-leaved pink-sorrel) – are sometimes misleadingly sold as "four-leaf clover", taking advantage of the mystical status of four-leaf clover.


== Selected species ==
Sources USDA, Nesom

Oxalis acetosella – common wood sorrel, stabwort
Oxalis adenophylla – Chilean oxalis, silver shamrock
Oxalis albicans – hairy woodsorrel, white oxalis, radishroot woodsorrel, radishroot yellow-sorrel, California yellow-sorrel
Oxalis albicans var. pilosa formerly O. pilosa 
Oxalis alpina – alpine sorrel
Oxalis ambigua
Oxalis amblyosepala
Oxalis amplifolia now considered O. drummondii 
Oxalis arborea Hort.
Oxalis arenia
Oxalis articulata Savign. – pink-sorrel
Oxalis articulata ssp. rubra  (St.Hil.) Lourteig
Oxalis ausensis
Oxalis barrelieri – lavender sorrel
Oxalis bowiei – Bowie's wood-sorrel, Cape shamrock
Oxalis brasiliensis
Oxalis bulbocastanum
Oxalis caerulea – blue woodsorrel
Oxalis caprina
Oxalis carnosa
Oxalis callosa
Oxalis chnoodes
Oxalis commutata
Oxalis compressa
Oxalis comptonii
Oxalis convexula
Oxalis corymbosa
Oxalis corniculata – creeping wood sorrel, procumbent yellow-sorrel, sleeping beauty, chichoda bhaji (India)
Oxalis crassipes – white wood sorrel
Oxalis debilis Kunth
Oxalis debilis var. corymbosa (DC.) Lourteig – large-flowered pink-sorrel (Synonym : O. corymbosa)
Oxalis decaphylla – ten-leaved pink-sorrel, tenleaf wood sorrel
Oxalis dehradunensis
Oxalis depressa
Oxalis dichondrifolia – peonyleaf wood sorrel
Oxalis dillenii Jacquin – southern yellow woodsorrel, Dillen's woodsorrel, Sussex yellow-sorrel
Oxalis drummondii – Drummond's woodsorrel, chevron oxalis
Oxalis ecuadorensis
Oxalis eggersii – Egger's wood-sorrel
Oxalis engleriana
Oxalis enneaphylla – scurvy-grass sorrel
Oxalis exilis – least yellow-sorrel
Oxalis fabaefolia
Oxalis flava
Oxalis florida
Oxalis fourcadei Salter
Oxalis frutescens – shrubby wood-sorrel
Oxalis frutescens ssp. angustifolia
Oxalis giftbergensis
Oxalis gigantea
Oxalis glabra – finger-leaf
Oxalis goniorhiza
Oxalis grandis – great yellow-sorrel, large yellow woodsorrel
Oxalis grayi is now considered O. decaphylla 
Oxalis griffithii Edgew. & Hook.f.
Oxalis hedysaroides – fire fern
Oxalis hirta – hairy sorrel
Oxalis hygrophila
Oxalis illinoensis – Illinois wood-sorrel
Oxalis inaequalis
Oxalis incarnata L. – pale pink-sorrel
Oxalis intermedia – West Indian wood-sorrel
Oxalis laciniata
Oxalis lasiandra – Mexican shamrock
Oxalis latifolia Kunth – garden pink-sorrel
Oxalis livida
Oxalis luederitzii
Oxalis luteola Jacq.
Oxalis macrocarpa
Oxalis magellanica G.Forst.
Oxalis magnifica Kunth – snowdrop wood-sorrel
Oxalis mallobolva
Oxalis massoniana
Oxalis megalorrhiza – fleshy yellow-sorrel
Oxalis meisneri
Oxalis melanosticta
Oxalis metcalfei now considered O. alpina 
Oxalis micrantha – dwarf woodsorrel
Oxalis montana – mountain woodsorrel, white woodsorrel
Oxalis monticola now considered O. alpina 
Oxalis namaquana
Oxalis natans
Oxalis nelsonii – Nelson's sorrel
Oxalis nigrescens A.St.-Hil.
Oxalis norlindiana
Oxalis obliquifolia
Oxalis obtusa
Oxalis oculifera
Oxalis oligophylla
Oxalis oregana – redwood sorrel, Oregon sorrel
Oxalis oreophila
Oxalis ortgiesii Regel – fishtail oxalis
Oxalis palmifrons
Oxalis pardalis
Oxalis pennelliana
Oxalis perennans
Oxalis peridicaria (= O. lobata)
Oxalis pes-caprae – Bermuda-buttercup, African wood-sorrel, Bermuda sorrel, buttercup oxalis, Cape sorrel, English weed, soursob, "goat's-foot", "sourgrass", soursop (not to be confused with the fruit of that name)
Oxalis pilosa see O. albicans 
Oxalis polyphylla
Oxalis polyphylla heptaphylla
Oxalis priceae – tufted yellow-sorrel
Oxalis puberula
Oxalis purpurea L. – purple wood-sorrel
Oxalis radicosa – dwarf woodsorrel
Oxalis regnellii – false shamrock, purple shamrock, love plant
Oxalis repens
Oxalis rosea Feuillée ex Jacq. – annual pink-sorrel
Oxalis rubens
Oxalis rubra A.St.-Hil. – red wood-sorrel
Oxalis rufescens
Oxalis rugeliana – coamo
Oxalis schaeferi
Oxalis spiralis – spiral sorrel, volcanic sorrel, velvet oxalis
Oxalis squamata
Oxalis stricta  – common yellow woodsorrel, common yellow oxalis, upright yellow-sorrel, lemon clover, "pickle plant", "sourgrass, "yellow woodsorrel"
Oxalis suksdorfii – western yellow woodsorrel, western yellow oxalis
Oxalis tenuifolia
Oxalis texana
Oxalis tetraphylla – four-leaved pink-sorrel, four-leaf sorrel, Iron Cross oxalis, "lucky clover"
Oxalis thompsoniae
Oxalis tomentosa
Oxalis triangularis – threeleaf purple shamrock
Oxalis trilliifolia – great oxalis, threeleaf woodsorrel
Oxalis tuberosa – oca, oka, New Zealand yam
Oxalis valdiviensis – Chilean yellow-sorrel
Oxalis virginea – virgin wood-sorrel
Oxalis versicolor – candycane sorrel
Oxalis violacea – violet wood-sorrel
Oxalis vulcanicola – Oxalis spiralis ssp. volcanicola – volcanic sorrel or velvet oxalis
Oxalis zeekoevleyensis


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Bais, Harsh Pal; Park, Sang-Wook; Stermitz, Frank R.; Halligan, Kathleen M. & Vivanco, Jorge M. (2002): Exudation of fluorescent β-carbolines from Oxalis tuberosa L. roots. Phytochemistry 61(5): 539–543. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(02)00235-2 PDF fulltext
Bais, Harsh Pal; Vepachedu, Ramarao & Vivanco, Jorge M. (2003): Root specific elicitation and exudation of fluorescent β-carbolines in transformed root cultures of Oxalis tuberosa. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 41(4): 345-353. doi:10.1016/S0981-9428(03)00029-9 Preprint PDF fulltext
Łuczaj, Łukasz (2008): Archival data on wild food plants used in Poland in 1948. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 4: 4. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-4-4 PDF fulltext