Epitonium is a genus of small predatory sea snails, marine gastropod mollusks. Epitonium is the type genus of the family Epitoniidae, the wentletraps.The common name wentletraps is derived from the Dutch word wenteltrap, denoting a spiral staircase. This refers to the striking form and sculpture of the shells of the mollusks in this genus, and to a lesser extent, the whole family. 
The genus Epitonium has been divided in the past by some authors into several subgenera, but these subgenera were based only on shell characters and did not reflect the true underlying relationships or phylogeny.


== Shell description ==
Epitonium shells are high-spired, and are all-white in most of the species within this genus. A few species are tinted with brown to varying degrees, or have a brown stripe on the shoulder of the whorl. The shells typically have blade-like vertical ribs, known as costae.


== Habitat ==
Wentletraps usually live in sand near sea anemones or corals.


== Life habits ==
These snails are predators and feed by inserting their proboscis and biting out small pieces of the anemone's tissues. Some species of wentletrap feed on only one species of sea anemone, in other words they are species-specific in terms of their prey.


== Synonymised genera ==
Many species that now are placed in the genus Epitonium have, over the years, been classified in other genera. These have become synonyms of Epitonium :


== Species ==

Species within the genus Epitonium include:
Note: Some malacologists have recently placed many of the more than 600 named species into other genera, which were previously considered to be subgenera of the genus Epitonium. On the other hand, many species that belonged to subgenera of Epitonium are now included in Epitonium. These subgenera were based on details of the shell sculpture and  not on molecular analysis.

Subgenera and species brought into synonymy
Epitonium (Asperiscala)'' de Boury, 1909: synonym of Epitonium Röding, 1798
Epitonium (Boreoscala) Kobelt, 1902: synonym of Boreoscala Kobelt, 1902
Epitonium (Clathrus) : synonym of Epitonium Röding, 1798
Epitonium (Kiiscala) Nakayama, 1995 : synonym of Cycloscala Dall, 1889
Epitonium delicatulum (Adams H., 1869): synonym of Epitonium tenerum (H. Adams, 1873)


== See also ==
Wentletrap, an article about the family Epitoniidae.


== References ==

Gofas, S.; Le Renard, J.; Bouchet, P. (2001). Mollusca. in: Costello, M.J. et al. (eds), European Register of Marine Species: a check-list of the marine species in Europe and a bibliography of guides to their identification. Patrimoines Naturels. 50: 180-213.
"Epitonium". Integrated Taxonomic Information System.
Powell A. W. B., New Zealand Mollusca, William Collins Publishers Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand 1979 ISBN 0-00-216906-1


== External links ==
Röding P.F. (1798). Museum Boltenianum sive Catalogus cimeliorum e tribus regnis naturæ quæ olim collegerat Joa. Fried Bolten, M. D. p. d. per XL. annos proto physicus Hamburgensis. Pars secunda continens Conchylia sive Testacea univalvia, bivalvia & multivalvia. Trapp, Hamburg. viii, 199 pp.
Suter H. (1913). Manual of the New Zealand Mollusca with an atlas of quarto plates. Wellington. xxiii + 1120 pp.
Kilburn R.N. (1985). The family Epitoniidae (Mollusca: Gastropoda) in southern Africa and Mozambique. Annals of the Natal Museum. 27(1): 239-337
Brown L.G. & Neville B.D. (2015). Catalog of the recent taxa of the families Epitoniidae and Nystiellidae (Mollusca: Gastropoda) with a bibliography of the descriptive and systematic literature. Zootaxa. 3907(1): 1-188