Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus is a species of shrub in the daisy family of the Americas known by the common names yellow rabbitbrush and green rabbitbrush.


== Distribution ==
The plant is widespread across of North American in much of the western United States and western Canada, from British Columbia and Montana south to California and New Mexico, with a few populations in the Black Hills of South Dakota and in western Nebraska, as well as in South America in the Andean valleys of Chile and Argentina.
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus grows easily in alkaline and saline soils, and thrives on soils that are rich in calcium. It rapidly establishes in disturbed habitat, including burns, flooded washes, and rockslides, so it is a valuable shrub for revegetating damaged land such as overgrazed rangeland and abandoned mining areas.


== Description ==
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus grows up to about 150 cm (59 in; 5 ft) in height, with spreading, brittle, pale stem branches. The leaves are up to a few centimeters long and may be thin and thread-like or up to a centimeter wide and oblong. They are glandular, resinous, and sticky.
The inflorescence is a bushy cluster of flower heads, each head one-half to one centimeter long. The flower head is lined with sticky yellow-green phyllaries and contains several yellowish protruding flowers.
The fruit is a hairy achene a few millimeters long with a wispy pappus at the tip. The species grows in sagebrush and woodland habitatChrysothamnus viscidiflorus contains an unusual m-hydroxyacetophenone derivative, named viscidone, and chromanone derivatives.


== Ecology ==
It is a larval host to the sagebrush checkerspot and it is an important nectar source in the fall.


=== Subspecies and varieties ===
Subspecies and varieties include:
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus subsp. axillaris (D.D.Keck) L.C.Anderson — desert slopes in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, Utah
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus subsp. lanceolatus (Nutt.) H.M.Hall & Clem. — Pennington County in South Dakota
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus subsp. planifolius L.C.Anderson — Arizona
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus subsp. puberulus (D.C.Eaton) H.M.Hall & Clem. — alpine zones in Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus subsp. viscidiflorus  — alpine talus in most of the species range
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus var. latifolius
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus var. serrulatus (Torr.) Greene — Utah, Nevada
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus var. stenophyllus
Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus var. viscidiflorus


== References ==


== External links ==
USDA Plants profile for Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus (yellow rabbitbrush)
CalFlora database: Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus (green rabbitbrush,  stickyleaf rabbitbrush, yellow rabbitbrush) — with subspecies links
Jepson eFlora, The Jepson Herbarium, University of California, Berkeley
NPIN−Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center: Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus
Flora of Eastern Washington and Adjacent Idaho: Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus
Southwest Colorado Wildflowers
Goldenweeds and Rabbitbrush Found East of the Cascade Mountains of Oregon and Washington: Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus ssp. lanceolatus — (green rabbitbrush, lanceleaf rabbitbrush, yellow rabbitbrush)
University of California, Calphotos photo gallery — Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus
 Media related to Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus at Wikimedia Commons