The Italian wall lizard or ruin lizard (Podarcis siculus, from the Greek meaning agile and feet) is a species of lizard in the family Lacertidae. P. siculus is native to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, France, Italy, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovenia, and Switzerland, but has also been introduced to Spain,  Turkey, the United States, and Canada. It is the most abundant lizard species in southern Italy.P. siculus gained attention in 2008 following the publication of a research study that detailed distinct morphological and behavioral changes in a P. sicula population indicative of "rapid evolution".


== Habitat ==
Its natural habitats are Mediterranean-type shrubby vegetation, rocky areas, rocky shores, sandy shores,  rural gardens, pastureland, plantations, and urban areas.


== Subspecies ==

P. siculus contains dozens of subspecies. The current distribution patterns of the subspecies have been interpreted as the consequence of natural events, including regional glacial refuges and postglacial area expansions, and multiple introductions by man.The island endemic Santo Stefano lizard (P. s. sanctistephani) became extinct in 1965 after introduction of predators, interbreeding with introduced wall lizards, and a disease epidemic, which wiped out the last remnants.
List of subspecies: P. s. adriaticus,
P. s.  aemiliani,
P. s.  amparoae,
P. s.  astorgae,
P. s.  attaroi,
P. s.  bagnolensis,
P. s.  bolei,
P. s. calabresiae,
P. s.  campestris,
P. s. caporiaccoi,
P. s.  cettii,
P. s. ciclopica,
P. s.  coeruleus,
P. s.  cucchiarai,
P. s.  dupinici,
P. s.  fiumanoideus,
P. s. flavigulus,
P. s.  gallensis,
P. s.  hadzii,
P. s.  hieroglyphicus,
P. s.  insularus,
P. s.  klemmeri,
P. s.  kolombatovici,
P. s.  laganjensis, 
P. s.  lanzai,
P. s.  latastei,
P. s.  massinei,
P. s.  monaconensis,
P. s.  nikolici,
P. s.  palmarolae,
P. s.  pasquinii,
P. s.  paulae,
P. s.  pelagosae,
P. s. pirosoensis,
P. s.  pohlibensis,
P. s.  premudanus,
P. s.  premudensis,
P. s.  pretneri,
P. s.  radovanovici,
P. s. ragusae,
P. s.  salfii,
P. s.  samogradi,
P. s.  sanctinicolai,
†P. s.  sanctistephani,
P. s.  siculus,
P. s.  tyrrhenicus,
P. s.  vesseljuchi.


== Rapid adaptation ==
 

In 1971, 10 adult specimens (five breeding pairs) of P. siculus were transported from the Croatian island of Pod Kopište to the island Pod Mrčaru (about 3.5 km to the east). Both islands lie in the Adriatic Sea near Lastovo), where the lizards founded a new bottlenecked population. The two islands have similar size, elevation, microclimate, and a general absence of terrestrial predators and  P. siculus expanded for decades without human interference, even outcompeting the (now locally extinct) Podarcis melisellensis population.In the 1990s, scientists returned to Pod Mrčaru and found that the lizards currently occupying Mrčaru differ greatly from those on Kopište. While mitochondrial DNA analyses have verified that P. siculus specimens currently on Mrčaru are genetically very similar to the Kopište source population, the new Mrčaru population of P. siculus was described as having a larger average size, shorter hind limbs, lower maximal sprint speed, and altered response to simulated predatory attacks compared to the original Kopište population. These population changes in morphology and behavior were attributed to "relaxed predation intensity" and greater protection from vegetation on Mrčaru.In 2008, further analysis revealed that the Mrčaru population of P. siculus has significantly different head morphology (longer, wider, and taller heads) and increased bite force compared to the original Kopište population. This change in head shape corresponded with a shift in diet: Kopište P. siculus are primarily insectivorous, but those on Mrčaru eat substantially more plant matter. The changes in foraging style may have contributed to a greater population density and decreased territorial behavior of the Mrčaru population.Another difference found between the two populations was the discovery, in the Mrčaru lizards, of cecal valves, which slow down food passage and provide fermenting chambers, allowing commensal microorganisms to convert cellulose to nutrients digestible by the lizards. Additionally,  nematodes were common in the guts of Mrčaru lizards, but absent from Kopište P. siculus, which do not have cecal valves. The cecal valves, which occur in less than 1% of all known species of scaled reptiles, have been described as an "adaptive novelty, a brand new feature not present in the ancestral population and newly evolved in these lizards".


== As an introduced species ==
Populations of P. siculus in North America have been documented from Topeka, Kansas, Long Island, New York, Greenwich, Connecticut, and Levittown, Pennsylvania.  The species seems to be extending its range from an initial colonization event in western Long Island, presumably by using railroad tracks as dispersal corridors. On the West Coast, ''P. sicula'' was introduced to San Pedro, California, in 1994 by a traveler coming back from Sicily. There is also an introduced population on Orcas Island in Washington State.


== See also ==
List of reptiles of Italy


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Podarcis sicula at Wikimedia Commons