Hieracium ,
known by the common name hawkweed and classically as hierakion (from ancient Greek ιεράξ, hierax 'hawk'),  
is a genus of the sunflower (Helianthus) family Asteraceae), and closely related to dandelion (Taraxacum), chicory (Cichorium), prickly lettuce (Lactuca) and sow thistle (Sonchus),
which are part of the tribe Cichorieae. Hawkweeds, with their 10,000+ recorded species and subspecies, do their part to make Asteraceae the second largest family of flowers.
Some botanists group all these species or subspecies into approximately 800 accepted species, while others prefer to accept several thousand species. Since most hawkweeds reproduce exclusively asexually by means of seeds that are genetically identical to their mother plant (apomixis or agamospermy), clones or populations that consist of genetically identical plants are formed and some botanists (especially in UK, Scandinavia and Russia) prefer to accept these clones as good species (arguing that it is impossible to know how these clones are interrelated) whereas others (mainly in Central Europe and USA) try to group them into a few hundred more broadly defined species. What is here treated as the single genus Hieracium is now treated by most European experts as two different genera, Hieracium and Pilosella, with species such as Hieracium pilosella, Hieracium floribundum and Hieracium aurantiacum referred to the latter genus. Many members of the genus Pilosella reproduce both by stolons (runners like those of strawberries) and by seeds, whereas true Hieracium species reproduce only by seeds. In Pilosella, many individual plants are capable of forming both normal sexual and asexual (apomictic) seeds, whereas individual plants of Hieracium only produce one kind of seeds. Another difference is that all species of Pilosella have leaves with smooth (entire) margins whereas most species of Hieracium have distinctly dentate to deeply cut or divided leaves.

A dry roadside dotted with small, ¾ inch red orange flowers, interspersed with very similar yellow ones, and often the white of daisies, is a good sign that you are in Hawkweed country.


== Description ==


=== Flowers and flower-heads ===
Hieracium or hawkweeds, like others in the family Asteraceae, have mostly yellow, 
tightly packed flower-heads of numerous small flowers
but, unlike daisies and sunflowers in the same family, they have not two kinds of florets but only strap-shaped (spatulate) florets, each one of which is a complete flower in itself, not lacking stamens,
and joined to the stem by leafy bracts.  As in other members of the tribe Cichorieae, each ray corolla is tipped by 3 to 5 teeth.


=== Bracts, stems and leaves ===
Erect single, glabrous or hairy stems, sometimes branched away from the point of attachment, sometimes branched throughout.
The hairiness of hawkweeds can be very complex: from surfaces with scattered to crowded, tapered, whiplike, straight or curly, smooth to setae; "stellate-pubescent" or surfaces with scattered to crowded, dendritically branched (often called, but seldom truly, "stellate") hairs; and "stipitate-glandular" or surfaces with scattered to crowded gland-tipped hairs mostly. Surfaces of stems, leaves, peduncles, and phyllaries may be glabrous or may bear one, two, or all three of the types of hairs mentioned above.Like the other members of the Chicory tribe, hawkweeds contain a milky latex.


== Ecology ==
The Large Yellow Underwing moth (Noctua pronuba) feeds on Hieracium species.


== Distribution ==
Hieracium species are native to Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, Central America and South America.


== Species ==

The classification of Hieracium into species is notoriously difficult. One reason is the apomictic reproduction (in which plants asexually produce seeds), which tends to produce a lot of minor geographical variation. Over 9000 species names have been published in Hieracium but some botanists regard many of those as synonyms of larger species.


=== Europe ===
Hieracium attenboroughianum – Attenborough’s hawkweed
Hieracium bakerianum
Hieracium hethlandiae
Hieracium lucidum Guss. – Sicilian Sparviere
Hieracium insolitum (Zahn) Üksip
Hieracium villosum Jacq.


=== North America ===
The list below is a selection of species that have been accepted by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and Canada.
A more complete list is given in the list of Hieracium species.


== Plant pest ==
All species of the genus Hieracium are classed as invasive species throughout New Zealand. They are banned from sale, propagation and distribution under the National Pest Plant Accord. Hieracium is a pasture weed that reduces available feed for livestock and displaces the indigenous plants. It is a particular threat in alpine ecosystems previously dominated by native tussocks, though it will colonise habitats from bare ground, to exotic pine forest, to native Southern Beech forest.In the United States, many species of Hieracium have been introduced and all species present are considered noxious weeds in one or more states.In Australia, hawkweeds are invasive pests in alpine regions, all species of Hieracium are listed or declared under various State Acts.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Espie, Peter (2001). Hieracium in New Zealand: ecology and management. Mosgiel: AgResearch. ISBN 0-478-20900-2.
McCosh, D. and Rich, T.C.G. 209. Hieracium proximum (Caithness Hawkweed) in Ireland. Ir. Nat J. 30: 54.
Rich, T.C.G., Cotton, D.C.F., Hood, R.L.I.B., Houston, L., McCosh, J. and Jackson, M.B.W. 2009. Conservation of Ireland's biodiversity: status of the Irish endemic Hieracium basalticola Pugsley (Basalt Hawkweed) (Asteraceae). Ir. Nat J. 30: 79–89.


== External links ==
 Data related to Hieracium at Wikispecies
 Media related to Hieracium at Wikimedia Commons
Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS). "Standard Report Hieracium". Retrieved 2007-12-18.
Nicklas Strömberg. "Hieracium on GlobalTwitcher.com". Images on Hieracium found in Sweden. GlobalTwitcher.com. Archived from the original on 2011-07-11. Retrieved 2008-06-15.
Jan Suda; Anna Krahulcová; Pavel Trávnícek; Radka Rosenbaumová; Tomás Peckert; Frantisek Krahulec (7 October 2007). "Genome Size Variation and Species Relationships in Hieracium Sub-genus Pilosella (Asteraceae) as Inferred by Flow Cytometry". Annals of Botany. Oxford Journals. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 2007-12-16.
"Hawkweeds". Hawkweed Identification, Management and Research. Moscow, ID: University of Idaho. Archived from the original on 2007-10-20. Retrieved 2007-12-16.
British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture and Lands. "Orange Hawkweed (Hieracium aurantiacum)". Field Guide to Noxious and Other Selected Weeds of British Columbia. Retrieved 2007-12-16.
"Hieracium Management Gateway". Tussock Grassland Management Information System. Archived from the original on 2008-10-14. Retrieved 2009-01-12.