Physalis (, , , , from φυσαλλίς phusallís "bladder") is a genus of flowering plants in the nightshade family (Solanaceae), which grow in warm temperate and subtropical regions of the world. Most of the species, of which  75–90 may exist, are indigenous to the Americas. Cultivated species and weedy annuals have been introduced worldwide. A notable feature is the formation of a large, papery husk derived from the calyx, which partly or fully encloses the fruit. The fruit is small and yellow to orange, similar in size, shape, and structure to a small tomato (hence the name husk tomatoes).
At least 46 species are endemic to Mexico.Many Physalis species are called groundcherries. One name for Physalis peruviana is Inca berry; another is Cape gooseberry, not to be confused with gooseberries of the genus Ribes (family Grossulariaceae).  Other names used to refer to the fruit are poha berries and golden berries.


== Description ==
Physalis species are herbaceous plants growing to 0.4 to 3.0 m tall, similar to the common tomato, a plant of the same family, but usually with a stiffer, more upright stem. They can be either annual or perennial. Most require full sun and fairly warm to hot temperatures. Some species are sensitive to frost, but others, such as the Chinese lantern, P. alkekengi, tolerate severe cold when dormant in winter.


== Cultivation and uses ==

These plants grow in most soil types and do very well in poor soils and in pots. They require moisture until fruiting. Plants are susceptible to many of the common tomato diseases and pests, and other pests such as aphids, whiteflies, spider mites, and the false potato beetle (Leptinotarsa juncta) also attack them. Propagation is by seed. Some species are self-incompatible and require pollen from other plants to bear fruit.
Not all Physalis species bear edible fruit. Select species are cultivated for their edible fruit, however; the typical Physalis fruit is similar to a firm tomato in texture, and like strawberries or pineapple in flavor, with a mild acidity. Some species, such as the Cape gooseberry and tomatillo, have been bred into many cultivars with varying flavors, from tart to sweet to savory. Physalis fruit are rich in cryptoxanthin. The fruit can be used like the tomato. Once extracted from its husk, it can be eaten raw and used in salads. Some varieties are added to desserts, used as flavoring, made into fruit preserves, or dried and used like raisins. They contain pectin and can be used in pie filling. Ground cherries are called poha in the Hawaiian language, and poha jam and preserves are traditional desserts made from Physalis plants grown on the Hawaiian Islands.The Cape gooseberry is native to the Americas, but is common in many subtropical areas. Its use in South Africa near the Cape of Good Hope inspired its common name. Other species of commercial importance include the tomatillo (P. philadelphica). Some nations, such as Colombia, have a significant economic trade in Physalis fruit.  Physalis spp. are widely cultivated in India.
Some species are grown as ornamental plants. For example, the hardy Physalis alkekengi has edible small fruits, but is most popular for its large, bright orange to red husks.
In Chinese medicine, Physalis species are used to treat such conditions as abscesses, coughs, fevers, and sore throat. Smooth groundcherry (P. subglabrata) is classified (erroneously) as a hallucinogenic plant, and its cultivation for other than ornamental purposes is outlawed in the US state of Louisiana under State Act 159.
The extinct Dacian language has left few traces, but in De Materia Medica by Pedanius Dioscorides, a plant called Strychnos alikakabos (Στρύχνος άλικακάβος) is discussed, which was called kykolis (or cycolis) by the Dacians. Some have considered this plant to be P. alkekengi, but the name more likely refers to ashwagandha (Withania somnifera).


== Diversity ==

As of 2005, about 75 to 90 species were placed in the genus.Species include:
Physalis acutifolia (Miers) Sandw. – sharp-leaved groundcherry, Wright groundcherry
Physalis alkekengi L. – Chinese lantern, Japanese lantern, bladder-cherry, winter-cherry, hōzuki (Japanese)
Physalis angulata L. – cut-leaved groundcherry, lance-leaved groundcherry, camapu
Physalis angustifolia Nutt. – coastal groundcherry
Physalis arenicola Kearney – cypress-headed groundcherry
Physalis carpenteri Riddell ex Rydb. – Carpenter's groundcherry
Physalis caudella Standl. – southwestern groundcherry
Physalis chenopodifolia
Physalis cinerascens (Dunal) A.S. Hitchc. – small-flowered groundcherry
Physalis clarionensis
Physalis cordata Mill. – heart-leaved groundcherry
Physalis coztomatl Moc. & Sessé ex Dunal
Physalis crassifolia Benth. – thick-leaved groundcherry, yellow nightshade groundcherry
Physalis foetens Poir. – tropical groundcherry
Physalis grisea (Waterfall) Martínez – strawberry-tomato
Physalis hederifolia A.Gray – ivy-leaved groundcherry
Physalis heterophylla Nees – clammy groundcherry
Physalis hispida (Waterfall) Cronq. – prairie groundcherry
†Physalis infinemundi Wilf et al. 2017 fossil from the Ypresian of Argentina
Physalis ixocarpa
Physalis latiphysa Waterfall – broad-leaved groundcherry
Physalis longifolia Nutt. – common groundcherry, long-leaved groundcherry
Physalis longiloba
Physalis mimulus
Physalis minima L. – pygmy groundcherry, native gooseberry (Australia)
Physalis missouriensis Mackenzie & Bush – Missouri groundcherry
Physalis mollis Nutt. – field groundcherry
Physalis noronhae
Physalis peruviana L. – Cape gooseberry, Peruvian groundcherry, Inca berry, uchuva (Colombia), poha
Physalis philadelphica Lam. (syn. P. ixocarpa) – tomatillo, Mexican groundcherry, jamberry, Mexican tomato, tomate de cáscara, tomate de fresadilla, tomate milpero, tomate verde
Physalis pruinosa L. – strawberry groundcherry
Physalis pubescens L. – golden strawberry, Chinese lantern
Physalis pumila Nutt. – dwarf groundcherry
Physalis subulata Rydb. – Chihuahuan groundcherry
Physalis tamayoi
Physalis turbinata Medik. – thicket groundcherry
Physalis virginiana Mill. – Virginia groundcherry
Physalis viscosa L. – grape groundcherry, star-haired groundcherry
Physalis walteri Nutt. – Walter's groundcherry 


=== Formerly placed here ===
Deprea orinocensis (Kunth) Raf. (as P. orinocensis Kunth)
Leucophysalis grandiflora (Hook.) Rydb. (as P. grandiflora Hook.)
Quincula lobata (Torr.) Raf. (as P. lobata Torr.)
Salpichroa origanifolia (Lam.) Baill. (as P. origanifolia Lam.)
Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal (as P. somnifera L.)


== Fossil record ==
A 52 million year old fossil fruit of Physalis has been found in Patagonia.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Groundcherries, (cape-gooseberries or poha), raw". Nutrition Facts. Self Nutrition Data.
Sorting Physalis names