Senecio flaccidus, formerly recorded as Senecio douglasii (in honor of the botanist David Douglas), member of the daisy family and genus Senecio  also known as threadleaf ragwort (and threadleaf groundsel, bush senecio, creek senecio, shrubby butterweed, comb butterweed, smooth threadleaf ragwort, Mono ragwort, Douglas ragwort, Douglas groundsel, sand wash groundsel, felty groundsel, old man, yerba cana, squawweed or cenicillo), is a native of the southwestern Great Plains of North America.


== Description ==
Threadleaf ragwort is a fast-growing, short-lived (3 to 6 years) bushy perennial shrub growing to 4 feet 6 inches (1.37 m); common in gravelly washes, dry creek beds, along roads and trails and mostly away from the coast.
Leaves and Stems
Branched and bushy, Senecio flaccidus gets its common name from its white, threadlike, bent and matted, tomentose leaves; alternate and deeply pinnated, divided into five to nine narrow linear segments, glabrous, having no hairs or projections, gray-green above, 1 inch (2.5 cm) to 4 inches (10 cm) long. The principal leaves often have auxiliary clusters of smaller leaves.  The stems are grooved and the branches are thin, herbaceous above and woody near the base.Flowers
Showy flowering heads of yellow ray flowers, 3 inches (7.6 cm) – 4 inches (10 cm) across; eight to thirteen sterile rays, purplish brown disk florets that produce the seeds.Seeds
Dicotyledon fruits; each a 1/8 inch (3 mm) long achene ribbed and hoary, covered with short white hairs.


== Toxicity ==
Colonizing disturbed areas including over-grazed lands, Senecio flaccidus helps to achieve a quick ground cover and helps to stabilize the soil for longer-lived perennials but in this situation makes poor foraging for cattle and horses due to the alkaloids contained in the plant which cause liver disease when consumed in large quantities.Also known as Senecio longilobus, one of the alkaloids found in this species is longilobine, as well as senecionine, seneciphylline, florosenine, otonecine-based florosenine, and retrorsine.


== Distribution ==
Like many Senecio Senecio flaccidus likes disturbed habitats, this one preferring overgrazed rangelands, dried up stream beds and desert grasslands; at altitudes above 1,800 feet (550 m) and below 6,500 feet (2,000 m).

Native 
America
North-Central: Kansas, Oklahoma
Northwestern: Colorado
South-Central: New Mexico, Texas
Southwestern: Arizona, Utah
Northern Mexico: Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, San Luis Potosí, Sonora, Zacatecas
Central Mexico: Aguascalientes, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Jalisco (n.e.), VeracruzCurrent 
America
North-Central: Kansas, Oklahoma, Wyoming
Northwestern: Colorado
South-Central: New Mexico, Texas
Southwestern: Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah
Northern Mexico: Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, San Luis Potosí, Sonora, Zacatecas, Baja California
Central Mexico: Aguascalientes, Baja Norte, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Jalisco (n.e.), Veracruz


== Subspecies which are synonyms ==
Senecio flaccidus Less. var. flaccidus
Senecio douglasii DC. var. longilobus (Benth.) L.D. Benson
Senecio douglasii DC. var. jamesii (Torr. & A. Gray) Ediger ex Correll & M.C. Johnst.
Senecio douglasii DC. ssp. longilobus (Benth.) W.A. Weber
Senecio flaccidus Less. var. monoensis (Greene) B. L. Turner & T. M. Barkley
Senecio flaccidus Less. var. douglasii  (DC.) B. L. Turner & T. M. Barkley
Senecio flaccidus var. flaccidus


== See also ==
Pyrrolizidine


== References ==


== External links ==
 Data related to Senecio flaccidus at Wikispecies
 Media related to Senecio flaccidus at Wikimedia Commons

Integrated Taxonomic Information System Organization (ITIS) (20 December 2007). "Senecio flaccidus". Integrated Taxonomic Information System on-line database. Retrieved 20 February 2008.
Arizona Vascular Plant Herbarium. "Senecio flaccidus". Southwest Environmental Information Network. Retrieved 20 February 2008.
Calflora. "Taxon Report – 7491". Information on California plants for education, research and conservation. The Calflora Database. Retrieved 20 February 2008.