The brown-throated parakeet (Eupsittula pertinax), also known as the St. Thomas conure or the brown-throated conure, in aviculture, is a species of parrot in the family Psittacidae.


== Description ==
The brown-throated parakeet is mostly green, with the lower parts being a lighter green than the upperparts. Black/grey beak. Some blue in the wing feathers. Head and face colors depend on the subspecies. Though most subspecies are brown-throated, both E. p. pretax and E. p. pathogenic have most of the head, including the throat, orange-yellow. It is not to be confused with the similarly-named extinct Brown-headed parakeet of Raiatea in the Society Islands (Tahiti and its neighbors), more commonly known as the Society parakeet. It interacts with abiotic features as well, like rocks. They use it as their platform mostly for singing and dancing. This species of parakeets predominantly eat seeds and forage for them in small groups. They utter loud calls while flying through the habitat, foraging groups either respond or stay silent. If the foraging group responds, groups flying above may join the foraging group or carry on.


== Distribution and habitat ==
It is found widely in woodland, savanna and scrub throughout northern South America and the southeastern Caribbean in Colombia, Venezuela, the Guianas, Trinidad and Tobago, the ABC islands in the Netherlands Antilles, and northern Brazil (mainly the Rio Negro/Branco region) with a disjunct population in south-western Pará. Another disjunct population is found in southern Central America in Panama and Costa Rica, and is sometimes considered a separate species, the Veraguas parakeet (A. ocularis). The brown-throated parakeet has been introduced to Puerto Rico (where now possibly extirpated), the U.S. Virgin Islands (mainly Saint Thomas, hence the alternative name St. Thomas conure), and various other islands in the Lesser Antilles (at least Dominica; recent sightings also from Martinique and Guadeloupe).


== Taxonomy ==
There are several subspecies which have varying colours particularly of the crown, face and underparts.
Eupsittula pertinax (Linnaeus, 1758):
Eupsittula pertinax aeruginosa (Linnaeus, 1758)
Eupsittula pertinax arubensis (Hartert, 1892)
Eupsittula pertinax chrysogenys (Massena & Souance, 1854)
Eupsittula pertinax chrysophrys (Swainson, 1838)
Eupsittula pertinax griseipecta Meyer de Schauensee, 1950
Eupsittula pertinax lehmanni Dugand, 1943
Eupsittula pertinax margaritensis (Cory, 1918)
Eupsittula pertinax ocularis (Sclater, PL, 1865)
Eupsittula pertinax paraensis Sick, 1959
Eupsittula pertinax pertinax (Linnaeus, 1758)
Eupsittula pertinax surinama Zimmer & Phelps, WH, 1951
Eupsittula pertinax tortugensis (Cory, 1909)
Eupsittula pertinax venezuelae Zimmer & Phelps, WH, 1951
Eupsittula pertinax xanthogenia (Bonaparte, 1850)


== References ==


== External links ==
"Brown-throated parakeet - BirdLife Species Factsheet". BirdLife International (2008). Retrieved 3 January 2009.
"Brown-throated parakeet - avibase Species". avibase.
"Brown-throated parakeet - IUCNredlist Species". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.