Myrtus communis, the common myrtle or true myrtle, is a species of flowering plant in the myrtle family Myrtaceae. It is an evergreen shrub native to southern Europe, North Africa, Western Asia, Macaronesia, and the Indian Subcontinent, and also cultivated. It is also sometimes known as Corsican pepper. The medicinal properties of Myrtus communis were utilized as early as 600 B.C.E. Symbolically and ritually important in ancient times, it was used to represent honor, justice, prosperity, generosity, hope, love, and happiness. In Greco-Roman mythology, numerous gods were associated with the common myrtle and its flowers, such as Aphrodite and Demeter. Also key part of various Jewish traditions, it is one of the four species used in the festival of Sukkot, and the Bible records its use in purification ceremonies. As a shrub that thrives along water ways, it was also seen as a symbol of restoration and recovery.In Europe during the Renaissance, it came to be best known as a symbol of love, which led to the ongoing tradition of the flower as part of the wedding bouquet.  
For uses and further historical significance, see Myrtus.


== Description ==
The plant is an evergreen shrub or small tree, growing to 5 metres (16 ft) tall. The leaves are 2–5 centimetres (1–2 in) long, with a fragrant essential oil.The flowers are white or tinged with pink, with five petals and many stamens that protrude from the flower. The fruit is an edible berry, blue-black when ripe.Myrtus communis is known for its medicinal properties. It has been widely used as an anti-inflammatory reagent. The essential oils derived from this plant has anti-proliferative and anti-quorum sensing properties, helping against food spoilage. Myrtus communis berries are also macerated in alcohol to make Mirto liqueur.
This species and the more compact M. communis subsp. tarentina 
have won the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. They are hardy but prefer a sheltered position in full sun.

		
		
		


== References ==