Senecio angulatus, also known as creeping groundsel 
and sometimes as Cape ivy,
is a succulent flowering plant in the family Asteraceae. It is native to South Africa. It is a scrambling and a twining herb that can become an aggressive weed once established, making it an invasive species in some countries. However, it is grown as an ornamental plant for its satiny foliage and sweet-scented flowers.Senecio angulatus can be distinguished vegetatively from Delairea odorata by the lack of lobes at the leaf stalk base, the fleshy leaf surface and the outwardly curved leaf teeth. D.odorata lacks ray florets with petal-like ligules. Senecio tamoides has been misapplied in Australia and is currently considered to be Senecio angulatus.


== Description ==


=== Leaves and stems ===

Its form is a dense tangled shrub 2 metres (6.6 ft) tall or a climber that can reach 6 metres (20 ft) high, if suitable support is available. The leaves are rhombic to ovate, 3 centimetres (1.2 in) to 5 centimetres (2.0 in) long and 1 centimetre (0.39 in) to 5 centimetres (2.0 in) wide and occur in 1-4 pairs. They are thick, glossy, fleshy and coarsely toothed, with one to three teeth each side and bluntly lobed, with upper leaves becoming smaller with fewer teeth or none at all. They have a frosted look from a powdery coating on the lower side.Leaf stalks are 1 centimetre (0.39 in) to 4 centimetres (1.6 in) long.The stems are succulent, pale green, and are often variegated with pale yellow green and purple. They are slightly angular (not upright) and usually sparingly branched. Neither stems nor leaves are hairy.


=== Inflorescence ===

Senecio angulatus produces numerous flowers in open clusters at the end of its branches or stems. The honey-scented flowers are on an elongated stem that continue to open in succession from the base up as the stem continues to grow. The flower clusters are more flat at the top than pyramid-like, and are 4 centimetres (1.6 in) to 8 centimetres (3.1 in) in diameter.  Often the cluster droops with the flower heads at the end of the cluster turning upwards.Flower stalks are mostly hairless or with some short hairs, 6.5 millimetres (0.26 in) to 10.5 millimetres (0.41 in) long. Attached to flower stalks are 8-11 fine pointed  bracts 5 millimetres (0.20 in) to 6 millimetres (0.24 in) which are surrounded by 4-7 pale green and sometimes purple tinged  supplementary bracts at the base, 1.5 millimetres to 2.5 millimetres which make a cup shape around the base of the involucre.Individual flower-heads are radiate and urn-shaped. The corolla has a disc comprising 10-15 dull golden yellow disc florets.  Each disc floret is a hairless tube with a slight expansion below the middle and lobes 1.3 millimetres to 2 millimetres wide. 4- 6 ray florets surround the disc florets and have yellowligules 
(that look like petals) 5.5 millimetres (0.22 in) to 9.5 millimetres (0.37 in) long that make the flowers look daisy-like.An autumn-winter bloomer, the plant flowers from April to May in Southern Africa and May to July in Australia and New Zealand. In the northern hemisphere, particularly in Italy and Spain, it flowers from November to the end of January.


=== Fruits and reproduction ===
Creeping groundsel is easily dispersed by wind-blown seed, stem fragments, and dumped garden waste. Achenes are 3 millimetres to 4 millimetres long, ribbed or grooved with short hairs in the grooves and a tapering cylindrical shape. The parachute-like hairs, the pappus, are 5 millimetres to 7 millimetres long.


== Cultivation ==
 
The plant is cultivated in parts of North Africa, Southern Europe and the Levant.  It was introduced in Malta in the 15th century as an ornamental plant. In Queensland, climbing groundsel may have increased in popularity following the Boer War, as there were anecdotal accounts that it was introduced from South Africa by the soldiers who returned to Australia after 1902. Moreover, it was displayed in garden pillars in Brisbane newspapers between 1906 and 1910, praising the plant for the beauty of both its foliage and its yellow clusters of blooms. Though these reports may have falsely applied the S. angulatus name to Senecio tamoides, which was a weed at that time on the east coast.The plant was collected as a weed in Melbourne's southern suburb of Mornington in 1936, and was displayed in newspaper column submissions in areas between Bendigo and Swan Hill in the 1940s and 1950s. In Melbourne metropolitan area, it became prevalent on coastal banks and on decomposed rock gullies of suburban creeks.The plant grows in USDA hardiness zones 9a through 11b and is medium to fast-growing. Very drought tolerant, it would flourish better with some water in the summer and would bloom more often in full sun. It can grow indoors as a houseplant, provided it gets some sunlight. Pruning is necessary as the plant can become limp when it gets taller.Propagation can be done by cuttings (as the plant easily roots from the branch tips), and this is to be conducted between spring and fall. Seeds prefer consistent moisture and warm temperatures to germinate. Annual fertilisation is necessary, though not mandatory. Pests include aphids.


== Distribution ==
It is native to the Cape Province in South Africa, but is naturalized in parts of South Italy, France, Portugal and some coastal areas in southeastern Australia. It is invasive in New Zealand and an environmental weed in Victoria, Australia. Because it is aggressive, it can smother the existing native vegetation both in the ground layer and canopy, thus altering the light climate in the invaded community and sometimes suppress the regeneration of native plants.Native:

Afrotropic
Southern Africa: South Africa (Cape Province)Current

Afrotropic
East Tropical Africa: Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania
Southern Africa: South Africa
Australasia
Australia: Western Australia (Esperance Plains, Warren, Swan Coastal Plain), New South Wales (South Coast and Mid North Coast), southern Victoria and Tasmania.
New Zealand: New Zealand North, New Zealand South (Nelson City, Wairau Bar (Marlborough), Banks Peninsula)
Palearctic
Northern Africa: Tunisia, Libya and Algeria
Macaronesia: Canary Islands (Gran Canaria, Hierro, Tenerife), Balearic Islands (Ibiza, Formentera, Mallorca, Menorca)
Southwestern Europe: Corsica, Channel Islands, Spain, France & Monaco, Portugal
Southeastern Europe: Italy, Sardinia, Sicily, Albania, Croatia and surrounding islandsSources: GRIN, ALUKA, FBAF, NSWF, NZPND, BGB


=== Habitat ===
Creeping groundsel prefers soils of black calcareous and grey sand, sandy clay and limestone. It finds homes with these soils in coastal areas on cliff faces, mudflats, wet depressions in dunes, near swamps, in landfills, scrubland and near settlements, especially near the sea.


== Common names ==
English: Creeping groundsel, garden senecio, mile-a-minute, scrambling groundsel
French: Séneçon anguleux (senecio angular)
Italian: senecio rampicante (creeping senecio)
Spanish: la hiedra del Cabo, senecio hiedra (cape ivy, senecio ivy)
Xhosa: inDindilili
Arabic: الشيخة القريض, الشيخة الزحف القريض, دعسة القطة, سلك التلفون‎ (telephone cord, cat's footprint, climbing groundsel)


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Senecio angulatus at Wikimedia Commons
 Data related to Senecio angulatus at Wikispecies
Senecio angulatus in the CalPhotos photo database, University of California, Berkeley
"Herbarium record". Neotropical Herbarium Specimens. fieldmuseum.org. Retrieved 2008-04-22.